Neuro-Ocular
Cranial Nerves
52 flashcards

Mnemonic to name all 12 cranial nerves:
1 of 75

Oh Oh Oh To Touch And Feel Very Good Velvet AH

Mnemonic to name all 12 cranial nerve functions, as sensory, motor, or both:
2 of 75

Some Say Marry Money But My Brother Says Big Brains Matter More

Name where each cranial nerve originates from in the brain:
3 of 75

*Cerebrum: I, II *Midbrain: III, IV *PONS: V, VI, VII, VIII *Medulla: IX, X, XI, XII

Is CN II afferent or efferent?
4 of 75

Afferent - sensory– taking signals from the periphery and sending them to the brain)

The optic nerve leaves the eye through what bone?
5 of 75

Lesser wing of the sphenoid

Is the optic nerve part of the CNS (central nervous system) or PNS (peripheral nervous system)?
6 of 75

CNS - like other CNS structures, it has oligodendrocytes to myelinate it after the lamina cribrosa–it does NOT have Schwann cells like the PNS.

What is it called when myelination is found anterior to lamina cribrosa of the optic nerve?
7 of 75

Medullation

The optic nerve is surrounded by what three meningeal layers?
8 of 75

1. pia mater (inner) 2. arachnoid (center) 3. dura mater (outer)

Optic nerve fibers from the nasal retina ____  at the optic chiasm to cross to the contralateral side of the brain.
9 of 75

“decussate” or crossover

Optic nerve fibers communicating temporal retinal signals remain_____.
10 of 75

ipsilateral

CNIII enters the orbit through:
11 of 75

superior orbital fissure - and then splits to superior and inferior division.

The superior division of CN III innervates:
12 of 75

levator superioris palpebrae and superior rectus

The inferior division of CN III innervates:
13 of 75

medial rectus, inferior rectus, inferior oblique, ciliary muscle (excitatory parasympathetic)

The clinical signs of CN III palsy (full):
14 of 75

The eye is DOWN and OUT and dilated - Depression occurs because the palsy blows the levator and superior rectus and exo posture occurs because the palsy blows the  medial rectus. Loss of accommodation and dilation occurs due to lack of ciliary muscle parasympathetic innervation.

What is a top differential when there is a “blown pupil” included with full CN III palsy?
15 of 75

A dilated pupil is associated with a compressive lesion in the brain. - An ischemic lesion in the brain presents with an undilated (reactive) pupil.

Mnemonic to remember that outer fiber compression causes a blown pupil in CN III palsy:
16 of 75

BLOWN=BIG BAD BOY COMPRESSING OUTER FIBERS (i.e. a big tumor or big aneurysm)

Mnemonic to remember inner fibers damage results in a spared pupil CN III PALSY:
17 of 75

inner ischemic = inward pupil

In gaze shifting and gaze tracking, CN IV receives sensory input from ______ for torsional movements.
18 of 75

The rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal which mediates vertical and torsional control of gaze.

Trochlear nerve (CN4) is unique in 2 ways. It is the only cranial nerve to 1.____ and 2. ____.
19 of 75

1. Decussate (CROSSOVER) fully 2. Leave the dorsal/back side of the brain stem

CNIV enters the orbit via:
20 of 75

superior orbital fissure 

If an EOM palsy results from getting bonked on the back of the head, it is most likely a _____ CN palsy.
21 of 75

CN4, because it leaves dorsal/ behind the brain stem.

CNIV palsy presents with:
22 of 75

vertical strabismus - the eye CANNOT LOOK DOWN WHEN IT IS ADDUCTED and the patient has a compensating head tilt toward the nonstrabismic eye.

Where is the head tilt in a CNIV palsy?
23 of 75

Down and toward the unaffected eye (ie right eye palsy then the head is tilted down and to the left to try to get the right eye to intort) - “Head tilts to the healthy side”

The cotton wisp test of cornea the cornea tests the following cranial nerves:
24 of 75

The corneal reflex tests cranial nerve V as its afferent (sensory) loop and cranial nerve VII as its efferent (motor) loop.

True or false?  The lacrimal nerve of the maxillary branch of trigeminal innervates the lacrimal gland to secrete tears.
25 of 75

False. Tears are secreted from innervation of CN VII. - CN V has a branch called lacrimal, but it does not innervate the lacrimal gland (it runs around the gland but does not innervate).

CN6 palsy blows the lateral rectus, resulting in diplopia. What can cause CN VI palsy?
26 of 75

Anything! - Know it is thin and very vulnerable to any blows to the brain. Also, with raised intracranial pressure CN VI can be damaged due to the brainstem being pushed caudally towards the foramen magnum with a consequential stretching of the nerve. Injury to the abducens include microvascular infarcts, vascular and tumoral compression, direct trauma and infection.

Name an important brain location that isolates a unique CN VI palsy.
27 of 75

Petrous portion of the temporal bone, where CN VI makes a sharp bend.

The __ is the pre-motor control for horizontal gaze movements. It provides commands for the velocity of eye movements by sending excitatory interneurons to the ipsilateral abducens nucleus and inhibitory neurons to the contralateral abducens nucleus.
28 of 75

paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF)

The three rami of the facial nerve and its effector include:
29 of 75

Rami orbitales innervate orbital blood vessels. Rami lacrimales innervate lacrimal gland. Rami oculares innervate ocular blood vessels. - All three originate from the pterygopalatine ganglion, and enter the orbit through the inferior orbital fissure.

CN VII palsy can present as:
30 of 75

loss of taste, paralysis of facial muscles, dry eyes due to lack of no innervation to the lacrimal gland,  and lack of eyelid closure (Bell’s Palsy).

Optic Nerve (CN II) Pathway
31 of 75

Pathway (from front to back): Optic Nerve, Optic Chiasm, Optic Tract, Lateral Geniculate Nucleus, Optic Radiation, Visual Cortex in Occipital Lobe

Which fibers decussate at the cranial nerve II chiasm?
32 of 75

1. Nasal fibers cross or decussate. 2. Temporal fibers stay the course.

Pathway for CN III (from brain to eyes) 
33 of 75

Pathway (back to front): Midbrain→Cavernous sinus (with sympathetic fibers from the carotid) →Superior orbital fissure, then divides into superior and inferior branch

Innervation of the superior and inferior branch of CN III is:
34 of 75

1. Superior: Superior Rectus & Levator Palpebrae Superioris 2. Inferior: Inferior Oblique, Inferior Rectus & Medial Rectus

The parasympathetic pathway of CN III is:
35 of 75

Starts at edinger westphal nucleus of midbrain the travels with the inferior division and synapses at the ciliary ganglion and continues to innervate the ciliary muscle and pupil sphincter/constrictor. 

The sympathetic pathway that travels with CN III
36 of 75

Starts at the cavernous sinus (from the carotid) and innervates Muller’s muscle.

Pathway of CN IV: Trochlear Nerve
37 of 75

Pathway: Midbrain→ exits back of the brainstem and is the only cranial nerve that crosses, and innervates the superior oblique.

Name the only cranial nerve that leaves the posterior portion of the brain.
38 of 75

CN IV (trochlear nerve)

If there is trauma to the back of the head, which cranial nerve palsy would likely arise?
39 of 75

CN IV because it leaves the brain posteriorly.

Name the only cranial nerve that crosses from its site of origin and innervates the contralateral eye?
40 of 75

CN IV - CN IV is the only CN to leave posterior to brain AND only one that crosses.

Pathway if cranial nerve V:
41 of 75

Pathway (back to front): exits anteriorly from the pons→ synapses at Trigeminal Ganglion and then branches in ophthalmic V1, maxillary V2, and mandibular V3

Name the nerve that innervates the cornea (sensory)
42 of 75

CNV trigeminal nerve – specifically V1 ophthalmic branch

List the branches of trigeminal nerve and the holes they travel through.
43 of 75

V1: superior orbital fissure V2: foramen rotundum V3: foramen ovale

Pathway of cranial nerve VI:
44 of 75

Pathway (from back to front): Leaves pons→ travels over the sharp petrosal temporal bone→ goes through cavernous sinus→ innervates the lateral rectus

Pathway of cranial nerve VII:
45 of 75

Pathway: Leaves pons→ travels near the ear and parotid salivary gland→ innervates the face, tongue, lacrimal gland

Motor and sensory functions of cranial nerve VII:
46 of 75

1. Motor fibers: control facial movement, expressions and tear production (lacrimal gland). 2. Sensory fibers: taste to the anterior 2/3 of the tongue.

Name the origins of the cranial nerves of the brain:
47 of 75

*Cerebrum: 1 & 2 *Midbrain: 3 & 4  *Pons: 5,6 7, & 8. *Medulla: 9, 10, 11 & 12

Mnemonic for origins of the cranial nerve from the brain:
48 of 75

Cerebrum:  drum of alarm goes off at 2 amMidbrain: up to 4 (middle class working until 4pm), Pons: 5-8 (going fishing at the pond from 5-8 o'clock, Medulla: 9 on (sleep from 9pm and on)

Cranial nerves that are housed in the cavernous sinus:
49 of 75

CN3, CN4, CN5, AND CN6 - ONLY branches 1&2 of CNV transverse the sinus and the 3RD BRANCH OF CNV IS OUTSIDE THE CAVERNOUS SINUS.

Which branches of cranial nerve V transverse the cavernous sinus?
50 of 75

Only V1 and V2 are in the cavernous sinus. - V3 (MANDIBULAR) IS NOT IN THR CAVERNOUS SINUS.

Optic tract vs Optic radiations
51 of 75

1. Tract: Post-chiasm to LGN (lateral geniculate nucleus) 2. Radiation: Post-LGN to visual cortex

The visual cortex is in which lobe of the brain?
52 of 75

Occipital lobe


Neuro-Ocular
Extraocular Muscles
23 flashcards

Abducens motor innervation pathways: unilateral pathways VS contralateral pathways
53 of 75

1. Unilateral: goes to abducens motor neurons 2. Contralateral: goes to oculomotor nuclei then to contralateral side of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF).

Two types of eye movements:
54 of 75

1. gaze stabilization 2. gaze shifting (fovea) stabilization

Gaze stabilization means:
55 of 75

Stabilize the eye when the head moves

Name two types of gaze stabilization kinetics:
56 of 75

1. Vestibulo-ocular (fast) 2. Optokinetic (slow/rudimentary)

Gaze shifting means:
57 of 75

An Object moves- so you try to keep it centered on the fovea.

Name three gaze shifting kinetics:
58 of 75

1. vergence 2. smooth pursuit 3. saccade

True or False: Vestibulo-ocular and optokinetic movements are conjugate movements.
59 of 75

True, conjugate means both eyes move together in the same direction (ex. both move right).

True or False: Vergence movements are conjugate movements.
60 of 75

Vergences are eyes moving in different directions so they are disconjugate (both for divergence and convergence). - conVERGING EYES have one to the right and one to the left.

What does vestibulo-ocular mean?
61 of 75

Vestibular means ears/balance. - So this is ear/balance triggering eye movements.

In vestibulo-ocular movements, sensory information from the ___ directs the eyes to move in a direction opposite to the head movement.
62 of 75

semicircular canals and otoliths

In vestibulo-ocular kinetics, the angular acceleration of the head stimulates the hair cells of semicircular canals and results in eye rotations that are  _____ to the head's motion.
63 of 75

equal and opposite

True or False? Vestibulo-ocular and optokinetic motions INCREASE with CONVERGENCE.
64 of 75

False - It typically decreases in a null point which is often with convergence— however it DOES INCREASE with fixation.

Name the neural integrator for horizontal eye positions in vestibulo-ocular movements.
65 of 75

prepositus hypoglossi

Name the neural integrator for vertical and torsional eye positions in vestibulo-ocular movements.
66 of 75

Interstitial nucleus of Cajal (in the midbrain)

True or False? Saccades can ONLY be produced involuntarily (no voluntary input can make saccades).
67 of 75

False. Both voluntary and involuntary control can create saccades. - The frontal eye field initiates voluntary and memory-guided saccade (ex. skimming text). The superior colliculus initiates reflex/ involuntary orienting saccades (ex. rapid eye movement during sleep).

Describe: Saccades vs. Smooth Pursuits
68 of 75

1. Saccades are rapid and jerky and often involve stationary objects like book text. 2. Smooth pursuits is tracking a moving object.

Frontal vs Temporal Eye Field involvement in smooth pursuits or saccades:
69 of 75

1. Frontal is more involved with saccades 2. Temporal is more involved with pursuits

Parks 3 step is used for:
70 of 75

vertical tropias to isolate the weak muscle.

3 steps of Parks 3 step are:
71 of 75

1. Primary gaze: circle the ipsilateral depressors and the contralateral elevators. 2. Gaze: circle as the patient looks that way (based on gaze direction) 3. Head tilt: circle as a diagonal to mimic the way that head tilt looks. 

Diagram of Parks 3 step:
72 of 75

See diagram below.

Parks 3 step example: first step of RHT, left gaze, left tilt
73 of 75

circle ipsilateral depressors circle contralateral elevators

Parks 3 step example: second step of RHT, left gaze, left tilt
74 of 75

left gaze: circles as patient looks to the left

Parks 3 step example: third step of RHT, Left gaze, left tilt
75 of 75

Left tilt: Pretend they are tilting left and mimic that circle - The problem muscle is the one circled three times.
