Ocular Disease

Optic Nerve & Blood Vessels
63 flashcards

Describe pigment dispersion syndrome.
1 of 63

Commonly occurs in myopic male patients. Findings include: Krukenberg spindles, mid-peripheral iris transillumination defects, heavily pigmented trabecular meshwork, elevated IOP with diurnal variations, and optic nerve cupping if associated with glaucoma.

Differentiate pigment dispersion vs pseudoexfoliation.
2 of 63

Pigment Dispersion: Salt and pepper in angle on gonioscopy - Pseudoexfoliation: Flakey material in circular pattern on anterior lens capsule

Describe angle recession glaucoma.
3 of 63

DUE TO HISTORY OF BLUNT OCULAR TRAUMA, rupture of the ciliary body face causes a tear between the longitudinal and circular fibers of the ciliary muscle. There is a DECREASE IN AQUEOUS OUTFLOW, so IOP spikes causing unilateral glaucoma.

True or False? Central ARTERY occlusion can lead to neovascular glaucoma (NVG).
4 of 63

False - Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) is more common to have NVG.

Which presents with "blood and thunder" retinal hemorrhages in all quadrants? Central retinal artery occlusion or Central retinal vein occlusion?
5 of 63

CRVO has blood in all 4 quadrants, cotton wool spots, and dilated tortuous retinal veins. - CRAO is an ischemic, white retina with a cherry red fovea.

Describe collateral veins.
6 of 63

Thicker veins (typically on disc) that develop weeks to months after a buildup of fluid (like CRVO) to help accelerate drainage of excessive fluid.

Describe VEGF.
7 of 63

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), initiates growth of new poor vessels called neovascular vessels. It acts as a angiogenic factor growth factor for vascular endothelial cells.

What is the timeline a central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) can result in neovascular glaucoma (NVG)?
8 of 63

"90 day glaucoma”, can occur within 3 months of a CRVO.

Describe an ischemic vs non-ischemic central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO).
9 of 63

An ischemic CRVO is severe with poor prognosis to regain vision and entails 10DD's of non-perfusion. - A non-ischemic CRVO still has perfusion and better chance of vision at recovery.

Differentiate emboli vs thrombus.
10 of 63

Emboli TRAVEL from another location to clog AN ARTERY. - Thrombus is stationary (IE an artery compresses a vein which causes a local blockage).

Ocular emboli typically travel from what two places?
11 of 63

heart (longer, calcific, more dangerous, likely CRAO) and carotid artery (at bifurcations aka HOLLENHORST , smaller, round, likely to lead to BRAO)

List the most common systemic disease that leads to retinal central vein or branched vein occlusions.
12 of 63

Hypertension

Describe amaurosis fugax.
13 of 63

transient vision loss

True or False: Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) can cause papilledema.
14 of 63

Kind of true and kind of false. CRVO can cause disc swelling— but remember the term papilledema is isolated to increased intracranial pressure which does not occur in CRVO. For a CRVO the term papillitis is more appropriate.

What is a "CHERRY RED SPOT" and “CILIORETINAL SPARING” associated to to and what does it mean?
15 of 63

In a CRAO that has macula spared IF there is an *extra* cilioretinal artery providing blood flow from the choroid to the retina, rather then from the CRA. - A cherry red spot represents the network of foveal choroidal vessels that appear brighter after a CRAO due to retinal pallor. 

Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) represents death of _____.
16 of 63

optic nerve fibers

Describe the rule for thinning of the rim in primary open angle glaucoma (POAG).
17 of 63

C/D larger than 0.4 is at risk. The ISNT rule means inferior should be thicker than superior, followed by nasal and lastly temporal. If there is thinning in the inferior or superior optic nerve it is a sign of POAG.

Describe a drance heme.
18 of 63

A hemorrhage (blood) in the nerve fiber layer that crosses disc margin. This is a SIGN OPTIC NERVE FIBERS ARE DYING and a major sign of a glaucoma diagnosis or progression of glaucoma.

Describe bayoneting.
19 of 63

aka bean potting, it means the vessel dips down way low and then pops up on the other side of the optic cup. - Where the blood vessel shoots back up that’s a sign it’s a deep cup, and could be associated to glaucoma.

List some characteristic visual fields (4) associated to glaucoma.
20 of 63

1. nasal step 2. paracentral scotoma 3. arcuate scotoma starting at blindspot to nasa 4. altitudinal defect

Describe the associations of visual fields that respect vertical vs horizontal lines (raphes) respectively. 
21 of 63

horizontal: think glaucoma - vertical: think neurological (brain tumor or stroke)

Describe ocular hypertension.
22 of 63

Diagnosed when not associated to loss on nerve fiber layer of the optic nerve. No cupping of the nerve or no visual field loss—just IOP higher than 22mmHg.

Name 9 different types of SECONDARY glaucomas (caused by something else happening to result in glaucoma).
23 of 63

1. lens induced 2. inflammatory 3. exfoliative 4. pigmentary 5. steroid induced 6. traumatic 7. tumors 8. anterior segment abnormalities 9. neovascular

What is “lens induced glaucoma” called?
24 of 63

Phacomorphic glaucoma. - The lens gets so dense and big due to cataract formation is shifts forward and closes the trabecular meshwork causing a secondary narrow angle glaucoma.

Name an inflammatory secondary glaucoma.
25 of 63

uveitic glaucoma - think: pigment and inflammatory cells from the iris clog the trabecular meshwork.

Describe exfoliative glaucoma:
26 of 63

Pseudoexfoliation (PXE) glaucoma presents with pseudoexfoliative material built-up on the anterior lens capsule as wells as PXE material on lens zonules making them weak, and PXE material deposited like salt and pepper in the clogging the trabecular meshwork (seen on gonioscopy).

Differentiate Pigmentary Glaucoma vs Pseudoexfoliation (PXE) Glaucoma.
27 of 63

Pigmentary has trademark transillumination defects on the iris. - PXE has trademark circular material on the lens capsule and a “salt and pepper” trabecular meshwork

Which two unique glaucomas that are associated with increased episcleral venous pressure?
28 of 63

Sturge Weber and Carotid Cavernous Fistula

Describe Sturge Weber.
29 of 63

A congenital defect presenting with a PORT WINE STAIN BIRTHMARK on the child's face, seizures, and GLAUCOMA.  Atrophy or calcium blockages of blood vessels on the same side as port wine stain may be present.

Describe ghost cell glaucoma.
30 of 63

Degenerated red blood cells from a vitreous hemorrhage clog the trabecular meshwork. - So named “ghost cells” because the khaki colored blood cell they look like ghost of their formerly red form.

Describe optic atrophy.
31 of 63

more pallor (whitening) than cupping

Differentiate optic nerve pit vs coloboma.
32 of 63

1. Pit is a collagen lined pocket extending posteriorly. Seen as a tiny spot on the optic nerve but can be associated development of retinoschisis up to the macula. - 2. Coloboma is a malformation of embryonic tissue that appears as a like a keyhole due to incomplete closure. Usually larger, but typically *does not lead to fluid or retinoschisis to the macula.*

A patient reports headaches, nausea, and has an IOP 50 mmHg. Think:
33 of 63

Acute narrow-angle closure - If you see cupping and synechia think chronic or intermittent angle closure. **NEEDS LPI**
(laser peripheral iridotomy)

Race and refractive error most common to have an acute narrow-angle closure attack.
34 of 63

Race: Asian decent / Refractive error: Hyperopes - Think: both have anatomical narrow angles to begin with making them predisposed to closure.

True or False? A blown nerve in severe POAG can present with an afferent pupillary defect (APD).
35 of 63

True AND FALSE - The fibers are dead so they can't collect light to send to the brain… HOWEVER if the condition is bilateral and symmetrical an APD will not occur.

Which is more associated to glaucoma ??a thin or thick central corneal thickness??
36 of 63

Thin CCT is more risk for POAG. - Mnemonic: thin cornea = thinning optic nerve

Does a thin central corneal thickness underestimate or overestimate IOP measurements with applanation?
37 of 63

Thin CCT will underestimate of IOP as measured with applanation.

______ color loss may occur in early POAG vs _______ color loss may occur in late stage POAG.
38 of 63

Early stage is BLUE-YELLOW deficiency VS late stage is RED-GREEN.

Differentiate between color defects associated with optic nerve vs macular diseases.
39 of 63

Optic nerve loses blue-yellow. - Macula loses red-green.

CONFUSING: If macular disease is associated with red-green color deficiency, what does the “red cap desaturation” test check for? 
40 of 63

NOT MACULAR DISEASE (I KNOW!!!!) TESTING IS FOR OPTIC NERVE DISEASE - ex. If a patient sees a dimmer red cap on one side could show retrobulbar optic neuritis like in multiple sclerosis.

To reduce the progression of primary open angle glaucoma, the target IOP should be _____% less than TMAX.
41 of 63

20-30% off TMAX (highest tonometry IOP ever read for the patient). - Prostaglandin drops can take 2-4 weeks to reach maximum efficacy. 

What is typical maximum efficacy % drop for PGA drop?
42 of 63

25-30%

When should you avoid the use of prostaglandin drops?
43 of 63

*History of inflammation like cystoid macular edema (CME) *History of herpetic eye infection *Recent cataract surgery (can induce CME called Irvine-Gas) *Pregnancy (PGA’s induce labor) *Monocular glaucoma (due to prominent ocular side effects)

We all know you cannot prescribe beta-blocker glaucoma drop with lung issues like asthma or COPD. What is another contraindication to prescribing timolol?
44 of 63

myasthenia gravis

Alpha-agonist glaucoma drops (like brimonidine) cannot be taken with what oral medication due to cross-reactivity that could induce a HYPERTENSIVE CRISIS?
45 of 63

MOAIs (monoamine oxidase inhibitors) - Think: antidepressants and Parkinson's (ex Nardil)

Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CAI) drops cannot be prescribed in patients with with a ______ allergy.
46 of 63

sulfa allergy - could cause metabolic acidosis

True or False? Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor drops  can induce more corneal edema patients who have Fuch’s endothelial dystrophy.
47 of 63

True - Remember carbonic anhydrase is what brings fluid out of the cornea– so inhibiting it can trap more fluid in the cornea.

True or False? Pilocarpine can raise IOP.
48 of 63

False - Pilocarpine is a pupil constrictor, so it pulls the iris out of the trabecular meshwork, widening the angle & lowering the IOP.

Pilocarpine should be used with caution in patients with degenerative myopia because:
49 of 63

there is risk of retinal tear or retinal detachment as tugging the iris can also tug the retina.

In low or normal tension glaucoma, the etiology of optic nerve death is thought to be:
50 of 63

vascular dysregulation (blood flow problem) and microischemias (oxygen problem)

____ is the name of a common migraine drug that can induce ANGLE CLOSURE GLAUCOMA by supraciliary swelling, choroidal effusion, and ciliary body swelling  which leads to anterior rotation of iris-lens diaphragm.
51 of 63

Topiramate

Describe aqueous misdirection.
52 of 63

This condition usually follows intraocular surgery WITH A VERY SHALLOW AC. It is very rare, but aqueous no longer follows the  convection current causing IOP to spike. - It is also called malignant glaucoma because rapid intervention is needed to prevent blindness.

In angle recession glaucoma, what treatments may be the LEAST useful in lowering IOP?
53 of 63

Pilocarpine and selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT)

Describe Posner Schlossman syndrome.
54 of 63

Also known as glaucomatocyclitic crisis. This condition may occur as a virus (like herpes) attacks the trabecular meshwork. Classic symptoms are waxing and waning of unilateral mild pain and halos, with IOP varying 40 some visits and 10 some visits.

Describe the etiology of steroid-induced glaucoma.
55 of 63

Reduced outflow at the trabecular meshwork due to a “paralyzed” trabecular meshwork. - Think: more common with strong dexamethasone drops but CAN happen even with fluorometholone.

Describe a Krukenberg spindle.
56 of 63

A vertical line of pigment on the corneal endothelium which demonstrates that pigment has been rubbed off of the iris and dispersed into the convection current of the anterior chamber as in pigment dispersion syndrome.

Describe phacolytic vs phacomorphic glaucoma.
57 of 63

lytic: leakage of lens material through intact capsule to clog the trabecular meshwork - morphic: lens shifts forward and pushes the TM  closed

Describe plateau iris syndrome.
58 of 63

Anatomically the iris is flat then in the mid-periphery it bows forward and in far periphery it goes back to flat. This can lead to angle closure if the iris bunches up in trabecular meshwork.

Differentiate plateau iris angle closure vs pupil block IOP spike.
59 of 63

plateau: iris bows forward and bunches up in the trabecular meshwork. - pupil block: back of iris hits the lens and won't let aqueous flow from posterior chamber to anterior chamber.

Differentiate the corrective measures needed for plateau iris vs pupil block.
60 of 63

plateau: laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) - block: correct what is causing the blockage (ex air bubble from surgery) pilocarpine is the first choice then LPI.

Describe iridocorneal endothelial syndrome (ICE).
61 of 63

The corneal endothelium is sticky and continues to grow over the trabecular meshwork and clog it. Sticky iris clumps also adhere to the corneal endothelium. The eye appears to have diffuse iris strands plastered on back of endothelium.

Uveitis-glaucoma-hyphema (UGH) syndrome is caused by:
62 of 63

A malpositioned intraocular lens (IOL) rubbing the ciliary body or iris causing uveitis, bleeding (hyphema), and then a spike in IOP (glaucoma).

How do steroid drops increase IOP?
63 of 63

Steroids affects the trabecular meshwork (TM) by:	a. Increasing in surface area and size to clog the TM	b. Slowing phagocytic activity of the TM cells c. Inducing the TM to accumulate extracellular matrix proteins (fibronectin and elastin) d. Decreasing the synthesis of natural prostaglandins
