Ocular Anatomy
Cornea • Conjunctiva • Sclera
33 flashcards


Which part of the cornea has a steeper radius of curvature: the anterior or the posterior?
1 of 33

Posterior cornea is more steep (anterior 7.8 mm vs posterior 6.4 mm).

At birth, how does the diameter of the human cornea compare to its size in adulthood?
2 of 33

9.8mm at birth, so 90% of adult size (11.7mm)

At what age does the cornea stop growing?
3 of 33

2 years old

How much of the refractive power does the cornea hold compared to the crystalline lens?
4 of 33

2/3rd cornea (think huge dome so of course it has more refractive power) vs. 1/3rd crystalline lens

Is the central cornea or peripheral cornea thicker?
5 of 33

Peripheral cornea is 20% thicker than central cornea.

The three types and shapes of cells in the epithelium are:
6 of 33

* basal cells (tall columnar) * wing cells (umbrella or intermediate) * squamous cells (flattened)

How are basal cells of the epithelium attached to the underlying Bowman’s membrane?
7 of 33

hemidesmosome - Hemidesmosomes on the basal cells attach to the basal lamina, a layer separating the epithelium from Bowman's layer. Type VII collagen anchoring fibrils, pass through the hemidesmosomes, connecting the basal cells to anchoring plaques in the Bowman's layer.



Life cycle of a corneal epithelial cell:
8 of 33

Start as the stem cells of the palisades of vogt and then move downward to the basal layer. Next, they proceed upward and inward to the wing cells, and finally, end with the flat squamous surface cells before they are sloughed off.

Why do basal cells of the corneal epithelium store large amounts of glycogen and have many mitochondria?
9 of 33

High metabolic activity and stress in epithelial tissues act as a barrier.

X, Y, Z theory of the movement of corneal-epithelial cells says cells die by:
10 of 33

apoptosis

5 layers of the cornea:
11 of 33

Starting most superficial - Epithelium *Bowman’s *Stroma *Descemet’s *Endothelium

True or false: Conjunctiva covers the entire globe, including the cornea.
12 of 33

False - Conjunctiva does not cover cornea.

True or false: Conjunctiva covers the inner tarsal plate of the lids.
13 of 33

True - (i.e. palpebral conjunctiva)

Follicles of the conjunctiva are:
14 of 33

Clear fluid-filled sac of lymphocytes and macrophages. Blood vessels go around, vessels can never be in the middle.

Papillae of conjunctiva are:
15 of 33

Lymphocytes, red or pink in coloration. Blood vessel runs through the core.

Follicles of conj vs Papillae of conj: common ocular problems associated with both
16 of 33

Follicles vs Papillae - CHAT (“foll” sounds like “call” to have a chat) *Chlamydial *Herpes *Adenoviral *Toxic - Papillae: Allergies (VKC) or Contact lens (GPC)

Name three areas of conjunctiva:
17 of 33

bulbar, palpebral, fornix

At the corneal limbus, what is conjunctiva continuous with?
18 of 33

Conjunctiva becomes / is continuous with conreal epithelium.

Name the crypts for stem cells located on the conjunctival side of the cornea-conjuntival interface.
19 of 33

Palisades of Vogt

Artery supply to conjunctiva: 2 major sources
20 of 33

*anterior ciliary artery feeds bulbar conjunctiva *lacrimal artery feeds palpebral conjunctiva

What is the limbal loop of the conjunctival vasculature important for?
21 of 33

The limbal loop is an anastomosis (connection) of veins and arteries - If the loop shows injection it could indicate inflammation or infection in the eye.


Name the three parts of the sclera:
22 of 33

Episclera *Stroma *Lamina fusca

Collagen type 1 makes up sclera. What other proteins is abundant? 
23 of 33

elastin

Blood vessels in the episclera are:
24 of 33

anterior and posterior ciliary arteries

Why is the sclera opaque and cornea clear even though both are type 1 collagen?
25 of 33

Collagen in sclera is haphazard in size, thickness, and placement (nonuniform) while collagen in the cornea has very uniform lamella. - The lamina fusca is the inner layer of the sclera and is is not present anterior to the ciliary body.

What is the postulated structure that lamina fusca turns into when it stops traveling anterior in the eye?
26 of 33

scleral spur

The 5 penetrations of the sclera are:
27 of 33

Optic nerve *Short ciliary nerves and arteries *Long ciliary nerves and arteries *Vortex veins *Anterior ciliary arteries

Name the sheath between the bulbar conjunctiva and episclera.
28 of 33

Tenon's capsule

Is the corneal epithelium continuous with the conjunctival epithelium or the scleral epithelium?
29 of 33

conjunctival epithelium

Is the corneal Bowman’s layer continuous with the conjunctiva or the sclera?
30 of 33

Neither, it stops at end of the cornea.

Is the corneal stroma continuous with the conjunctival or scleral stroma?
31 of 33

scleral stroma

Is Descemet's continuous with conjunctiva or sclera?
32 of 33

No, it is not continuous with anything. Descemet's stops when the cornea stops.

What structure does the corneal endothelium travel on to become?
33 of 33

trabecular meshwork
