True or False? Descemet's does not regenerate when ruptured.
1 of 204

TRUE

In Fuchs dystrophy, as endothelial "pumping cells" die off, there is a characteristic sign called:
2 of 204

guttae

Fuchs dystrophy shows signs that the endothelial pumping cells have died off. This results from:
3 of 204

VIII collagen atypically built up on the endothelium.

The term given to corneal endothelial cells with varying cell area is:
4 of 204

polymegathism

The term given to corneal endothelial cells with differing shapes than their expected hexagonality is:
5 of 204

pleomorphism

Mnemonic for polymegathism vs pleomorphism
6 of 204

Mega is how fat a cell is. In a ballet, a "plie" is bending shape of legs to hexagon. - pleo =  hexagonality

In young adults, the cell density is about___ cells/mm^2.
7 of 204

2500-3500

The coefficient of variation (standard deviation/mean) for cell area is a clinically valuable marker and is about ____ in the normal cornea.
8 of 204

0.25

In the normal healthy cornea, about ____% of endothelial cells are hexagonal.
9 of 204

80%

____ provides a provisional matrix during the first phase of epithelial wound healing of the cornea.
10 of 204

Fibronectin

In the cornea, superficial epithelial cells are joined together  by ____. Basal epithelial cells are joined by _____. Stroma cells are joined by ______. Endothelial cells are joined by ______.
11 of 204

1. Surface: adherens junctions/tight junctions 2. Basal: hemidesmosomes 3. Stroma: gap junctions 4. Endothelium: zona occludens and macula occludens

The corneal stroma wants to suck in / absorb fluid. This is called:
12 of 204

imbibition

True or False: Endothelial cell density in the healthy human cornea increases with age.
13 of 204

False - Even in a healthy cornea endothelial cells die as we age.

Most of the sensory nerves in the cornea are derived from the ____  nerves of the ophthalmic branch of the ___ nerve.
14 of 204

ciliary nerves of the trigeminal nerve

Degeneration or dysfunction of sensory nerves (trigeminal nerve branches) in the cornea can result in delayed healing of corneal injuries and the development of neurotrophic ulcer / neurotrophic keratopathy. This is a due to a decrease in:
15 of 204

Substance P - Think of it as substance "Pain." Without it, in neurotrophic keratitis there is a painless ulcer.

In order for the cornea to have metabolic activity, oxygen diffuses from the  ____ and glucose diffuses from ___.
16 of 204

oxygen comes from tears & glucose comes from aqueous

Closure of the eyelids during sleep reduces the amount of oxygen that reaches the cornea. Corneal metabolism therefore changes from aerobic to anaerobic (with consequent accumulation of ___) during sleep.
17 of 204

lactate

List three  common causes of CORNEAL EPITHELIAL edema.
18 of 204

*endothelial dysfunction (such as in Fuch's or milkweed poisoning) *epithelial hypoxia (such as in PMMA contact lens wear) *epithelial trauma

List two examples of corneal epithelial cysts:
19 of 204

*rapidly multiplying cysts (ex: Meesmann's dystrophy) *degenerating cysts (ex: ABMD anterior basement membrane dystrophy)

Mnemonic for Meesmann's epithelial dystrophy:
20 of 204

Mice go EP! EP!  EP! (epithelial dystrophy)

In corneal allograft rejection, the donor epithelium may be attacked by sensitized ____.
21 of 204

cytotoxic T lymphocytes

Corneal epithelial deposits are most commonly  an iron ring, called:
22 of 204

Hudson Stahli line

Name the iron ring at bottom of a keratoconus cone:
23 of 204

Fleischer ring

Mnemonic for WHORL Keratopathy deposits
24 of 204

Mr. Fabry WHORLS his CHAI T

The most common cause of drug induced corneal whorl keratopathy is:
25 of 204

amiodarone

White "stuck on" lesions on the corean that start at Bowmans and rise up are called:
26 of 204

Salzmann's Nodules - consisting of hyaline and basement membrane

Name a disease where the cornea becomes keratinized / sickly and can stick to the palpebral conjunctiva.
27 of 204

Steven Johnson Syndrome / Ocular Cicatricial Pemphigoid

True or False? Bowman's layer does not regenerate. A defect in Bowman's layer fills with fibroblasts and connective tissue, creating a permanent scar.
28 of 204

True, Bowmans cannot regenerate.

The term of stromal thinning of the cornea is:
29 of 204

ectasia

The immune hypersensitivity term that is used to describe an edematous corneal stromal ring of migrating immune cells (polymorphonuclears and lymphocytes) is:
30 of 204

Wessely ring

Stromal deposits of cholesterol (senile arcus) are common after age 50- if seen before to years old, worry about:
31 of 204

hyperlipidemia or hyperlipoproteinemia

____dystrophy is an uncommon hereditary disease with abnormal deposition of cholesterol or  lipids usually in the anterior stroma of the central and peripheral cornea.
32 of 204

Schnyder's crystalline dystrophy = CHOLESTEROL in the ANTERIOR STROMA

Differences between corneal degeneration vs. corneal dystrophy:
33 of 204

degeneration is usually unilateral/ related to trauma or inflammation and dystrophy is usually genetic and bilateral.

Mnemonic for the stromal deposits found in stromal corneal dystrophies:
34 of 204

Marilyn Monroe Gets High In LA

Describe a dermoid cyst on the cornea:
35 of 204

A dermoid is fleshy skin-like cyst on the cornea. - It is nonpathogenic tissue that just randomly grows where it isn't supposed to be (...skin isn't suppose to be on the cornea).

If you hear "congenital defect on Descemet's" (invagination of Descemet's) automatically think of which condition?
36 of 204

Peters anomaly

Describe the appearance of Peters anomaly
37 of 204

There is a cloudy central cornea due to poor Descemet's function, with a clear periphery. The condition leads to glaucoma, amblyopia, and often has graft failure. - Other clinical features: cleft lip, cleft palate, short stature, abnormal ears, and intellectual disability.

Mnemonic for Peters anomaly:
38 of 204

Peter COTTON tail

Name the dystrophy characterized by:

Endothelial cells that can transdifferentiate into epithelial-like cells that march across the cornea in train-track like vesicles.
39 of 204

Posterior Polymorphous Dystrophy

Mnemonic Posterior Polymorphous Dystrophy
40 of 204

Morphin Power Rangers on a Train

The most common deposit in Descemet membrane is COPPER called:
41 of 204

Kayser-Fleischer ring in Wilson's disease

True or false: Corneal arcus is lipid deposits on the Bowman's layer.
42 of 204

False. Lipid deposits in arcus are on Descemet's.

Endothelial cells phagocytose pigment in disorders such as pigment dispersion syndrome. This results in a fine pigmented vertical line on the endothelium called.
43 of 204

Krukenberg's spindle

Whorl Keratopathy is also known as:
44 of 204

corneal verticillata

The routine media for isolating bacteria from the cornea, conjunctiva, and eyelids are broth-based agar with 5% sheep blood, chocolate agar, and mannitol salt agar. Which species grow on chocolate agar?
45 of 204

Haemophilus species, Neisseria gonorrhoeae & Nutrient Variant Streptococcus species

Mannitol salt agar is an optional medium that is very helpful to the microbiologist for differentiating ____ species.
46 of 204

Staphylococcus

The best agar to test for suspected fungal corneal infection is:(remember fungal ulcers have fluffy borders and causes are often due to vegetative trauma)
47 of 204

Sabouraud

Acanthamoeba grows in cysts called:
48 of 204

trophozoites

Acanthamoeba grows on plates plated with ________ to use as food.
49 of 204

E.coli & Enterobacter aerogenes

True or False:  Acanthamoeba and Viral DNA can both be cultured in PCR.
50 of 204

TRUE

Adenovirus can be detected from ocular specimens using these four methods:
51 of 204

1. cell culture isolation 2. shell vial 3. rapid antigen testing 4. PCR

Name the corneal dystrophy: ____ is caused by poor adhesion of epithelium to the basal lamina.

This results in symptomatic recurrent erosions and visual disturbances of glare and blue.

In this condition, the corneal epithelium can look like map whirls:
52 of 204

EBMD (Epithelial Basement Membrane Dystrophy)

Four interchangeable names for Anterior Basement Membrane Dystrophy:
53 of 204

*Anterior Basement Membrane Dystrophy (ABMD) *Epithelial Basement Membrane Dystrophy (EBMD) *Cogan's Dystrophy *Map-Dot Dystrophy

What is the gene implicated in Meesmann Dystrophy?
54 of 204

keratin gene (KRT3)

Describe gelatinous drop like corneal dystrophy description as well as its inheritance pattern.
55 of 204

Autosomal Recessive: White globular gel drops diffusely over the cornea (subepithelial).

Lattice, granular, and Avellino corneal dystrophies are all mapped to the same chromosomal location at __.
56 of 204

5q31

Name two Bowman's layer corneal dystrophies.
57 of 204

Reis-Bucklers corneal dystrophy (RBCD) & Thiel-Behnke corneal dystrophy (TBCD)

Describe Reis Bucklers and its inheritance pattern
58 of 204

Autosomal DOMINANT: bilateral subepithelial reticular opacities that focally elevate the epithelium, appearing symmetrically in both corneas beginning around the age of 5. - The opacities remain asymptomatic until they produce recurrent erosions.

Describe Thiel-Behnke
59 of 204

Thiel-Behnke corneal dystrophy is similar to RBCD  by subepithelial corneal opacities associated with RCE. -8 However, opacities can be differentiated by their honeycomb pattern and a clear zone near the corneoscleral limbus. TB DOES NOT EXTEND TO THE LIMBUS.

___ is an exocrinopathy (exocrine glands atrophy) in which the lacrimal and salivary glands are targeted by an autoimmune process associated to Rheumatoid Arthritis. Here, CD4 and CD8 T-cell cascades cause inflammatory death of tear producing cells.
60 of 204

Sjogren syndrome (SS)

Name the type of dry eye: ____ is a condition of obstructed oil-producing glands of the eyelid which leads to tear film instability, increased evaporation, and ocular surface alterations. Signs of the condition occur due to the diminished delivery of protective lipids to the tear film.
61 of 204

Meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) is a condition of obstructed meibomian glands that leads to tear film instability, increased evaporation, and ocular surface alterations because of the diminished delivery of protective lipids to the tear film.

Most corneal dystrophies are autosomal dominant. Name 5 dystrophies that stand out for having a different inheritance pattern.
62 of 204

MACULAR, GELATINOUS DROP-LIKE & CHED: AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE - LISCH and X-LINKED ENDO:
X-LINKED

Test your knowledge: Name the corneal layers and associated dystrophies.
63 of 204


Bowman's layer dystrophies are normally associated to what genetic mutation?
64 of 204

TGFb1

Name the corneal dystrophy: This is a combined granular and lattice dystrophy. Histology shows both hyaline and amyloid deposits in the stroma.
65 of 204

Avellino dystrophy

Name the corneal dystrophy: This dystrophy represents a defect in corneal lipid metabolism. Fifty percent of patients have raised serum cholesterol levels. Histology shows deposits of phospholipids and cholesterol.
66 of 204

Schnyder crystalline corneal dystrophy

Name the corneal dystrophy: Appearance of  crocodile shagreen or hexagonal crocodile skin with polygonal cloudy grey opacities in posterior stroma giving a leather-like appearance.
67 of 204

Central Cloudy Dystrophy of Francois

Name the corneal dystrophy: This dystrophy usually manifests after the age of 50 and commonly in females. Features include corneal guttata and beaten metal appearance. It is associated with endothelial failure and stromal edema.
68 of 204

Fuchs corneal dystrophy

Name the corneal dystrophy: A rare subtype of endothelial corneal dystrophy characterized by a diffuse ground glass appearance of the corneas and marked corneal thickening.

Characterized by bilateral edema from birth.
69 of 204

Congenital Hereditary Endothelial Dystrophy (CHED)

Another name for dry eye:
70 of 204

keratoconjunctivitis sicca

Bacteria that can penetrate through intact corneal epithelium include___.
71 of 204

*Corynebacterium diphtheriae *Neisseria meningitidis &  *Neisseria gonorrhoeae *Haemophilus influenzae *Listeria species

Describe megalocornea vs. buphthalmos:
72 of 204

*Megalocornea*: large cornea over 13mm at birth with NO GLAUCOMA - *Buphthalmos*: large cornea due to congenital glaucoma, elevated IOP, Haab striae, optic disc changes, and enlargement of the entire globe.

Haab striae are:
73 of 204

Haab striae are congenital breaks in Descemet's membrane that are usually oriented horizontally. They can indicate congenital glaucoma with a high IOP SPIKE. - Vertical breaks instead are associated to birthing forceps.

Mnemonic to remember the direction of Descemet's breaks in Haab striae vs. Forceps:
74 of 204

Haab= Horizontal Hereditary High IOP (all start with H) vs. Forceps that can cut like scissors snip in a vertical V pattern

Microcornea is diagnosed when the horizontal corneal diameter is less than or equal to _____in an otherwise normal-sized globe.
75 of 204

10mm

Describe anterior microphthalmos:
76 of 204

The entire anterior segment is small.

Differentiate microphthalmos vs nanophthalmos:
77 of 204

*MICRO*: entire eye is small and DISORGANIZED - *NANO*: entire eye is small but otherwise normal

Describe sclerocornea:
78 of 204

Sclerocornea is seen as a flat cornea with progressive scleralization peripherally and then centrally. The condition often requires corneal transplantation.

True or False: Patients with keratoglobus have a diffusely thinned cornea and are at risk for perforation with mild trauma.
79 of 204

TRUE

Describe Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome:
80 of 204

Posterior embryotoxon with iris bridging strands, iris hypoplasia causing corectopia, pseudopolycoria, and glaucoma due to iridogoniodysgenesis in infancy.

Describe posterior embryotoxon:
81 of 204

Thickened or hypertrophied Schwalbe's ring that is anteriorly displaced.

Describe corneal leukoma:
82 of 204

opaque area on the cornea

Describe corneal plana:
83 of 204

Cornea plana is a congenital condition where the cornea is flattened and the angle between it and the sclera is decreased.

Microcornea with posterior embryotoxon could indicate the presence of what systemic disease?
84 of 204

Alagille syndrome (liver malfunction)

A conical protrusion of the crystalline lens (called lenticonus) with the presence of painful recurrent corneal erosions at birth can be a sign of what systemic disease?
85 of 204

Alport syndrome (also characterized by hearing and kidney problems)

Name the congenital disease associated with very high congenital myopia,  high predisposition to cataracts, thin sclera and retinal detachment.
86 of 204

Sticklers syndrome (connective tissue disorder)

Name the congenital disease associated with a high prominent forehead, underdeveloped upper jaw, prominent eyes, fused fingers and/or toes (fused digits are pathognomonic).
87 of 204

Apert Syndrome (craniofacial abnormalities)

Name the congenital disease associated with prominent eyes (exorbitism, secondary to shallow orbits).
88 of 204

Crouzon Syndrome (fusing of skull sutures irregularly push facial features).

Name the congenital disease: epibulbar dermoids, microphthalmia, and coloboma.
89 of 204

Goldenhar syndrome (incomplete development of bones in the face, affecting the ears, nose, soft palate, lips, and jaw)

In the cornea, Vitamin A deficiency is characterized by the presence of ____.
90 of 204

Bitot spots, xerosis, and keratomalacia

Describe Bitot's spots
91 of 204

Specks of white keratinized hard nodules (<1mm) on the cornea-conjunctiva limbus (on the conjunctival side). - ASSOCIATED WITH VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY

Describe keratomalacia.
92 of 204

Malnutrition leading to a cloudy cornea.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantations (allo-HSCT) performed to treat malignancies can cause what ocular disease?
93 of 204

Graft vs Host Disease

The topical preservative in ophthalmic topical therapeutics called  ____may cause mild to severe ocular surface toxicity.
94 of 204

benzalkonium chloride  (BAK)

Describe  anesthetic drop abuse keratopathy.
95 of 204

persistent epithelial defects, ring-shaped infiltrates, and ultimately corneal perforation. The can occur with even dilute concentrations for a short duration.

True or False: Topical NSAIDs can be associated with corneal melting, particularly in the setting of dry eye and Steven Johnson syndrome.
96 of 204

TRUE

Atopic disease, Ehlers Danlos, and Down syndrome, and eye rubbing are all associated with:
97 of 204

keratoconus

Thinning at the apex of cornea with protrusion is the hallmark of___.
98 of 204

keratoconus

True or False: DSEK keratoplasty is appropriate for the keratoconus patients without deep stromal scarring and has the advantage of eliminating the potential for endothelial rejection.
99 of 204

False - Surgeons choose Deep Anterior Lamellar Keratoplasties (DALKS) for KCN as scarring is anterior. A DSEK is posterior.

Name the corneal disease associated with corneal protrusion above a band of inferior corneal thinning as well as a crab claw pattern on inferior topography.
100 of 204

pellucid marginal degeneration (PMD)

Differentiate Chandler vs Cogan-Reese versions of ICE:
101 of 204

COGAN-REESE presents with iris nodules, sticky iris nevi with corneal endothelial abnormalities. CHANDLERS presents with is sticky iris, endothelium, and corneal edema.

True or False: ICE syndrome is UNILATERAL.
102 of 204

TRUE

Ocular Disease
CorneaDeck 2 of 2
102 flashcards

Calcific band keratopathy may be associated with:
103 of 204

*hypercalcemia *hyperphosphatemia *hypervitaminosis D *chronic renal insufficiency *hyperparathyroidism

Name the term given to iron deposits that may be seen at the advancing edge of a pterygium.
104 of 204

Stocker's line

The swiss cheese holey appearance of band keratopathy caused by…
105 of 204

Characteristic small, dark, round holes are seen within the band and are thought to represent corneal nerves passing through Bowman's layer.

True or False: Band keratopathy is associated to a corneal acidic phase shift after silicone oil is placed in the treatment of a retinal detachment.
106 of 204

TRUE

Name the corneal degeneration:

Gray-white to bluish corneal nodular lesions typically in the superior periphery.

The condition is slowly progressive and localized anterior to Bowman's layer of both eyes.
107 of 204

Salzmann's Nodular Degeneration

Name some causes of Salzmann Nodular Degeneration:
108 of 204

Think: Degeneration. So it degenerates after an event like viral infection or refractive surgery - Examples are after vernal keratoconjunctivitis, trachoma, measles, scarlet fever interstitial keratitis, epithelial basement membrane dystrophy, rigid contact lens wear, and postoperative corneal surgery.

True or False: Terrien's marginal degeneration is inflammatory in nature.
109 of 204

False - Terrien's marginal degeneration is an uncommon, noninflammatory marginal thinning disorder of the cornea that appears to be degenerative in nature.

Describe the difference between Peripheral Ulcerative Keratitis (PUK) and Terrien's Marginal Degeneration:
110 of 204

PUK is large open ulcer (epithelium is broken) and unilateral. - Terrien's is a dip down with thinning of cornea superiorly The epithelium remains INTACT. Typically bilateral.

What is the major concern for Terrien's Marginal Degeneration?
111 of 204

Ectatic areas (areas where the cornea are very very thin) are at risk for perforation with minor trauma and may result in iris prolapse.

Name the corneal degeneration: Corneal microcysts (dots), map-like deposits & putty-like whorl deposits on the epithelium that can mimic fingerprints. Clinically they have negative NaFl staining.
112 of 204

Anterior Basement Membrane Degeneration (ABMD aka EBMD)

LASIK complications:

Inflammatory cells that build up at the flap interface are called _____  VS non-inflammatory PUTTY-LIKE cells are called ___________.
113 of 204

INFLAMMATORY= DIFFUSE LAMELLAR KERATITIS (DLK- treat with steroid drops) - NON-INFLAMMATORY= Epi- INGROWTH (steroid cannot treat epi in growth because it is non-inflammatory.

___ are the most common contact lens-associated pathogen in bacterial keratitis.
114 of 204

Pseudomonas species

What type of gram staining bacteria is pseudomonas?
115 of 204

gram-negative (treated with fortified tobramycin)

Describe a unique characteristic of acanthamoeba keratitis.
116 of 204

Starting off: Pain is out of proportion to small pinpoint signs. Then: A ring ulcer forms. - Histology: SHOWS CELLED OFF DOUBLE WALLED CYSTS UNDER CONFOCAL MICROSCOPY CALLED TROPHOZIOTES.

Treatment: acanthamoeba
117 of 204

POOL CLEANER STRENGTH MEDICATION TO BUST THROUGH CELLED-OFF TROPHOZOITES. - chlorhexidine or biguanidine is common. 

Name the differences between the penetrating keratoplasties (corneal transplants):
DALK, DSEK (or DMEK) & Penetrating keratoplasty
118 of 204

See chart below.

Crosslinking for keratoconus: Describe the  method & purpose.
119 of 204

Riboflavin is used with light to strengthen the cornea and halt keratoconus progression.

True or False: Herpes Simplex has only one KNOWN HOST-humans.
120 of 204

True - Attempts have been made to replicate HSV  in mice and pigs and the virus did not grow.

Which neural ganglia is infected in herpes simplex keratitis (to show a true dendrite).
121 of 204

trigeminal ganglia

Is Herpes Simplex a  RNA or DNA virus?
122 of 204

DNA

Does herpes simplex virus show as papillae or follicles?
123 of 204

Follicles - Think: Viral is usually follicles ("CHAT" with follicles)

Describe the active life cycle of herpes simplex virus:
124 of 204

1. small punctate vesicles (diffuse) 2. dendrite 3. trophic geographic ulcer 4. neurotrophic ulcer

True or False: Herpes Simplex Virus keratitis is only seen by a dendrite on the epithelium of the cornea. No other layers of the cornea are involved.
125 of 204

False - All layers of the cornea can be involved in HSV.

Describe disciform keratitis.
126 of 204

Round-shaped cornea edema associated with HSV. Localized in the stroma due to endotheliitis (malfunction of the endothelial pumps). - Think: A disc is round.

Is IOP usually elevated or decreased in ocular herpes simplex virus?
127 of 204

Higher IOP in HSV typical. - "H"SV has "H"igh IOP. 

Describe granulomatous vs non-granulomatous keratic precipitates (KPs).
128 of 204

Inflammatory cells built up on the back side of the corneal endothelium are KPs. Granulomatous are mutton fat, big, greasy and associated to chronic uveitis. Nongranulomatous are small specks and typically acute.

Name some causes of granulomatous KPs (mutton fat).
129 of 204

sarcoidosis, syphilis, and tuberculosis

Does herpes simplex present with granulomatous or nongranulomatous KPs?
130 of 204

nongranulomatous

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) infection is a highly contagious member of the herpes virus family that systematically causes ____ and ___.
131 of 204

varicella (chickenpox) and herpes zoster (shingles)

Acute herpes zoster includes _____days of prodromal symptoms including fever, malaise, headaches, and paresthesias, with pain, burning, itching, erythema, and edema in the affected dermatome.
132 of 204

1-4 days

What is the role dermatomes in the pathology of herpes zoster virus?
133 of 204

HZV only affects one side of the body due to dermatome mapping (a collection of nerve endings off of the spine to a designated part of the skin)

Describe a maculopapular rash.
134 of 204

A maculopapular rash is characterized by a mix of a flat, discolored area of skin (macule) and raised bumps (papules). - ASSOCIATED WITH VESICLES ON FOREHEAD FOR HZV.

Describe pseudodendrites vs true dendrites.
135 of 204

Pseudodendrite (think: HZV and TB) do not stain with fluress/NaFl and do not have terminal bulbs. - A true dendrite stains and has bulbs (HSV)

Describe a prodrome.
136 of 204

Signs a virus is coming: itchy eyebrows, tingling forehead.

Mycobacteria is specifically associated with:
137 of 204

Tubercuolosis - It has very thick, waxy, lipid-rich hydrophobic cell walls. Isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol are the only drugs proven to break thick cell walls. Less common mycobacteria is leprosy.

Fungi are eukaryotic (have a nucleus and other organelles). Unicellular fungi are called___and multicellular are called ____ microorganisms.
138 of 204

unicellular (yeasts) vs. multicellular (filamentous / molds)

Can fungi penetrate an intact corneal epithelium?
139 of 204

No, fungi need a break in epithelium to infect it (like vegetative trauma).

Name some common hot VS cold environmental fungi.
140 of 204

HOT: filamentous fungi (Aspergillus species, Fusarium species) - COLD:  Candida species ("C"old and "C"andida)

Mycotic keratitis is also known as:
141 of 204

fungal keratitis

Describe a "hyphenate" ulcer plus FEATHERY borders.
142 of 204

This mean the ulcer is branching (think: fungal).

Name three common corneal fungal ulcer treatments.
143 of 204

1. amphotericin B 2. natamycin 3. -azoles

If you read: Soft or rigid lens wearers, trauma, SWIMMING in contact lenses, noncompliance with contact lens disinfection systems, or HOT TUBS. Think:
144 of 204

Acanthamoeba

If you read: "ring ulcer" Think:
145 of 204

Acanthamoeba

Describe xerophthalmia:
146 of 204

Caused by severe vitamin A deficiency (dryness then corneal opacification, and death of rods and cones). - Associated with childhood blindness in third world countries.

Describe Onchocerciasis
147 of 204

River blindness is a chronic parasitic infection caused by Onchocerca volvulus. -Presents with:*skin lesions *severe itching *corneal and retinal scarring *intraocular damage from uveitis

Describe syphilitic keratitis in kids vs adults.
148 of 204

Kids: bilateral in children in late congenital syphilis. - Adults: unilateral in adults with late latent acquired syphilis.

Describe the causative organism in syphilis.
149 of 204

Gram-negative bacteria in a special shape called spirochete - Name: Treponema pallidum

The combination of 1. stromal keratitis 2. notched teeth 3. deafness in late congenital syphilis is called:
150 of 204

Hutchinson's triad

Differentiate Hutchinson triad VS Hutchinson sign
151 of 204

Triad: Congenital syphilis with dental problems and deafness. - Sign: Tip of nose has vesicles in zoster that is a strong predictor that the eye be affected by the virus.

Name the common treatment for syphilis.
152 of 204

penicillin

Name the three most common tests for syphilis.
153 of 204

Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL), Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR), Fluorescent Treponemal Antibody Absorption (FTA-ABS)

List the corneal indications for serologic testing for congenital syphilis.
154 of 204

BILATERAL stromal keratitis or keratouveitis with DEAFNESS

Name the corneal disease: A disease characterized by the attachment of balled-up degenerated epithelial cells and mucus on the corneal surface usually with underlying severe dry eye.
155 of 204

Filamentary Keratitis

Treating the underlying dry eye is a first-line therapy in filamentary keratitis (ie cyclosporine in Restasis or serum tears). Name treat other common treatments in filamentary keratitis.
156 of 204

Bandage contact lens and N- Acetylcysteine (Mucomist)

How does N- Acetylcysteine help in filamentary keratitis?
157 of 204

Mucolytic agents such as 10% N-acetylcysteine decreases the viscosity of mucus in the tear film. The ocular solution is a respiratory preparation compounded as an ophthalmic drop (mucomyst for lungs).

Name the corneal disease: Clinical findings include multiple fine, elevated white to gray central corneal dotlike opacities. The conjunctiva is usually white and quiet. Remissions of foreign body sensation are common.
158 of 204

Superficial Punctate Keratitis of Thygeson (aka Thygeson's)

Name a treatment of Thygeson's.
159 of 204

Low-dose topical corticosteroids ophthalmic drops and/ or cyclosporine

Name the corneal disease: ____ is a degenerative disease of corneal epithelium characterized by impaired healing and a non-healing ulcer with rolled borders. There is no sensation on the corneal sensitivity cotton wisp test.
160 of 204

Neurotrophic keratitis (NK) 

Name some causes of neurotrophic keratitis.
161 of 204

See table below.

True or False:  Substance K is the pain trigger that is decreased in neurotrophic keratitis.
162 of 204

False - Substance P (for pain) is decreased in NK.

Describe corneal hypesthesia.
163 of 204

A cornea without sensation. - Ex. neurotrophic keratitis presents with an ulcer but patient cannot feel it. It is "unfeeling and slow healing."

Name three common treatments of neurotrophic keratitis.
164 of 204

1. new Oxervate (growth factor) only FDA-approved for NK 2. serum  tears (blood tears) 3. amniotic membrane (AMT)

A common form of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye) associated with Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is known as:
165 of 204

Sjogren's (pronounced as show-grin)

True or False? Sjogrens usually presents as dry eye and dry mouth (lacrimal and salivary glands).
166 of 204

TRUE

After keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye), ____ is the most common ocular manifestation of rheumatoid arthritis.
167 of 204

scleritis

Name the 4 types of  ANTERIOR scleritis.
168 of 204

1. diffuse 2. nodular 3. necrotizing scleritis with inflammation 4.  necrotizing scleritis without inflammation (scleromalacia perforans)

Describe scleromalacia perforans.
169 of 204

Necrotizing scleritis WITHOUT inflammation.

SCLERITIS vessels (DO or DO NOT) blanch with topical application of Neo-Synephrine.
170 of 204

Scleritis vessels WILL NOT BLANCH  (the blood vessels are too deep) . Episcleritis vessels will blanch (the blood vessels are more superficial).

Name the scleral disease:

Concurrent  to anterior scleritis, proptosis, ocular pain worsening with eye movement, and exudative retinal detachment.
171 of 204

Posterior scleritis

Evidence of posterior scleral edema and inflammation can often be demonstrated on ultrasonography. This feature is called a:
172 of 204

T sign - Fluid collecting in the posterior episcleral space and extending around the optic nerve to make a T.

Is scleritis type III or type IV hypersensitivity?
173 of 204

Both - Type III (immune complex) and type IV (cell-mediated) hypersensitivity

True or False? Peripheral ulcerative keratitis is normally associated to inflammation like rheumatoid arthritis and causes a painful open gutter next to limbus with lots of blood vessel engorgement.
174 of 204

TRUE

True or False? Phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis (PKC) and staphylococcal marginal keratitis are both INFECTIONS.
175 of 204

False.

Phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis (PKC) and Staphylococcal marginal keratitis are both hypersensitivity reactions to a microbial antigen (not a true infection of the cornea but a reaction to the bacterial toxins to trigger this response). Phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis (PKC) is what type of hypersensitivity reaction?
176 of 204

type IV (cell mediated)

Staphylococcal marginal keratitis is most likely a type___ hypersensitivity reaction.
177 of 204

Type III (immune-mediated)

Describe the treatment phlyctenules and staph marginal keratitis.
178 of 204

Treat the acute inflammation with topical corticosteroids and decrease the load of bacterial antigens with topical antibiotics and lid hygiene to minimize recurrences.

Differentiate Mooren Ulcer vs Peripheral Ulcerative Keratitis
179 of 204

Mooren ulcer: idiopathic peripheral ulcerative keratitis in the absence of systemic comorbidities. PUK: ulcer associated to inflammatory systemic disease (RA)

Which is more damaging to the cornea?

Alkali (basic ABOVE 7 pH) vs Acid (below 7 pH) toxicity
180 of 204

Alkali burns are more caustic than acid. List some examples of alkali burns:
181 of 204

cement, ammonia. **lye,** lime, potassium hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide (fireworks)

Describe toxic anterior segment syndrome (TASS).
182 of 204

TASS is a postoperative INFLAMMATORY reaction caused by a NONINFECTIOUS agent. Presents with: limbus to limbus corneal EDEMA 12-48 hours after intraocular SURGERY. TASS must be carefully followed because permanent endothelial cell loss can occur.

Differentiate between TASS and Endophthalmitis.
183 of 204

TASS: non-infectious, happens fast (24 hours postop), edema, responds to steroids, limited to anterior segment. - ENDOPHTHALMITIS: infectious, 4-7 days postop, entire anterior and posterior segment affected. Does not respond to steroids.

Name the complication after cataract surgery: Development of irreversible corneal edema after cataract surgery and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation. Initially, there is endothelial trauma, which is followed by progressive stromal and epithelial edema. MAY NEED A DMEK to correct.
184 of 204

Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy (PBK)

True or False? In the refractive surgery radial keratotomy (RK), a series of deep, radial stromal incisions are made to flatten the cornea and reduce HYPEROPIA- but cannot be used to treat myopia.
185 of 204

False - RK is only for myopia. It is not used in hyperopes.

Three examples of FDA-approved disposable contact lenses for postoperative pain relief are:
186 of 204

Acuvue Oasys, AirOptix Night & Day, and PureVision

Rule of thumb: If the cornea is thinner than _____microns then PRK is more appropriate than LASIK.
187 of 204

500

Which procedure requires a bandage contact lens after surgery: LASIK or PRK
188 of 204

PRK (no flap)

The cornea has a penetrated wound due to trauma. What is the name of the dark fluid leakage sign visualized with with fluress?
189 of 204

Seidel

Describe a dellen.
190 of 204

Epithelized dip (usually next to an elevation like glaucoma bleb or pterygium). Fluress pools in this area. Corneal epithelium and Bowmans absorbs wavelengths BELOW 300 nm. Excessive absorption of  this short wavelength can lead to:
191 of 204

Photokeratitis - This happens within 48 hours after UV Blast. Results  from hyperactivation of K+ channels. Clinically shows dense SPK centrally.

True or False? Anticholinergic medications and antihistamines help to trigger the lacrimal gland to make better quality tears.
192 of 204

False - Both are associated to dry eyes.

Rule of thumb: How many microns are ablated away from the cornea for each diopter of LASIK correction?
193 of 204

15 um per diopter

Describe the difference between LASIK and LASEK.
194 of 204

LASEK makes the flap with alcohol.

Can conductive keratoplasty (CK) be used for myopia?
195 of 204

No. CK is only used for low hyperopia (+0. 75DS to +3.00 and presbyopia). Here, radioactive burning shrinks peripheral collagen fibers.

PMMA rings inserted into peripheral stroma to flatten cornea in keratoconus treatment are referred to as:
196 of 204

INTACS

True or False? Implantable Contact (collamer) Lens (ICL) requires a peripheral iridotomy or a patent fenestration on lens to prevent IOP spikes (secondary to pupillary block).
197 of 204

TRUE

If there is low vault on ICL (implantable collamer lens) (normal is 200-700m) what type of cataract can form?
198 of 204

Anterior subcapsular

Describe Diffuse Lamellar Keratitis (DLK) aka Sands of Sahara
199 of 204

INFLAMMATORY, NONINFECTIOUS, fine granular sand-like infiltrates at LASIK FLAP interface. Appears 2-3 days after LASIK with foreign body sensation. Treated with steroid drops and taper.

Describe Axenfeld Rieger vs Peters Anomaly
200 of 204

Both are anterior segment congenital malformations - Axenfeld: posterior embryotoxon, with IRIS STRANDS stuck to cornea and TM causing glaucoma. PETERS: IS CENTRAL OPACITY of cornea with dense edema.

Overall, corneal pumps move _____ into the stroma and ___ out into the aqueous. This maintains a gradient so the corneal won't stay swollen with too much edema (aka deturgescence).
201 of 204

Na+ into stroma, K+ out to aqueous and HCO3-(bicarbonate) out to aqueous

Name the anterior segment disease: _____ is a disorder of the corneal endothelium manifested by abnormal endothelial cell formation and a STICKY proliferating membrane of the  endothelium, chamber angle, and iris.
202 of 204

Iridocorneal Syndrome (ICE)

True or False? ICE syndrome is hereditary.
203 of 204

False - ICE syndrome is not hereditary.

Characteristics of a corneal degenerative process (not a dystrophy) are:
204 of 204

Degenerations often come after a trauma, UNILATERAL, PERIPHERAL, later onset, variable rate of progression, associated with neovascularization and inflammation
