Describe the different marginal reflex distance measurements. MRD1 vs. MRD2
1 of 107

1. MRD1 is the distance from the pupil center to the upper eyelid. 2. MRD2 the distance from the pupil center to the lower eyelid. - NEGATIVE NUMBERS INDICATE A COVERED PUPIL.

List the normal MRD measurement.
2 of 107

+2. Meaning the lid is at least 2 mm above the pupil center. Negative numbers indicate the lid is  past the pupil center.

Most lid-induced problems are related to lid laxity. Name one common lid-induced condition that arise from TOO MUCH LID TENSION/ FRICTION.
3 of 107

superior limbal keratitis (SLK)

Differentiate trichiasis vs madarosis.
4 of 107

1. Trichiasis is a misdirection of growth of lashes toward the eye. 2. Madarosis is missing lashes. - 
"I'm mad I'm missing lashes. They tried to grow the wrong way!"

Describe epiblepharon.
5 of 107

An extra skin / muscle flap nasally that is higher and tighter than normal on the lower lids. Can cause epiphora and entropion.

Describe the mucocutaneous junction.
6 of 107

The junction between keratinized skin to non-keratinized conjunctiva at the lid margin.

Differentiate sclerotic scatter vs specular reflection slit lamp techniques.
7 of 107

1. Sclerotic scatter: The lighthouse is at an angle and shined on the SCLERA. Here, internal reflection allows a diffuse view of the  cornea to be viewed. 2. Specular reflection: A PURKINJE image is shown on the cornea. In the shadows next to the image is the endothelium to allow for viewing of guttae.

Most biomicroscopes / slit lamps  consist of a parallel ____ telescope design.
8 of 107

Galilean

True or False? Rose Bengal stain can kill some viruses, which can affect viral PCR cultures.
9 of 107

TRUE

True or False? Lissamine Green stain can kill some viruses, which can affect viral PCR cultures.
10 of 107

False. - Lissamine Green has NO anti-viral properties.

True or False? Lissamine Green and Rose Bengal dyes are meant to stain conjunctival abnormalities.
11 of 107

TRUE

Differentiate Lissamine Green, Rose Bengal, and Trypan Blue ophthalmic dyes.
12 of 107

Both L. Green and R. Bengal are used to stain conjunctiva and soft tissues. R. Bengal is more toxic and painful and can stain early HSV. Trypan Blue is used in surgery for cataract capsules or tenon's capsule in enucleation.

Values below ____mm of wetting are diagnostic of aqueous tear deficiency in Schirmer testing.
13 of 107

5.5mm

Schirmer II IS ??WITH OR WITHOUT?? ANESTHESIA.
14 of 107

(WITH anesthesia) to measure basal tear secretion i.e. unstimulated tears.

Schirmer I (without anesthesia) has become the generally accepted method for assessing ___ tear production.
15 of 107

aqueous

Name the test: Tear samples are dried on a slide and examined under a microscope. They display a crystalline pattern of tear mucin. In aqueous tear deficiency- this pattern resembles ferns.
16 of 107

tear ferning - KNOW THIS IS TESTING MUCIN LEVELS: LESS MUCINS IS MORE DRY EYE.

True or False? In all types of dry eye disease, the tear film is in a HYPOosmolar state.
17 of 107

False - All types of dry eye have HYPERosmolar state (too salty).

Differentiate entropion vs ectropion.
18 of 107

Entropion: EN-rolls in and causes abrasions or even ulcers. - Ectropion: Eyelids rolled out, commonly causes epiphora.

Differentiate trichiasis vs distichiasis.
19 of 107

Trichiasis: posterior misdirection of eyelashes towards the cornea. - Distichiasis: eyelashes originate from the meibomian gland orifices making another row.

Describe eyelid imbrication syndrome.
20 of 107

The upper eyelid overlaps the lower eyelid during closure.

Define involutional entropion.
21 of 107

A decline in the normal functions of the human body, or of an organ, that occurs with age. - Here, lid laxity increases with age and the lid rolls into the globe.

Describe cicatricial entropion.
22 of 107

Cicatricial means scarring. Here something scarred stuck to the tarsal plate and made the eye roll inward.

True or False? Floppy Lid Syndrome can cause  papillary conjunctival reaction, corneal irritation, and DISCHARGE upon awakening.
23 of 107

TRUE

Floppy lid syndrome is common in:
24 of 107

obese males, who face down sleeping or use a CPAP for sleep apnea.

Describe lagophthalmos.
25 of 107

Incomplete eyelid closure. The lower lid cannot touch the upper lid margin.

Describe acrochordon.
26 of 107

Benign skin tag on the lid

Describe verruca vulgaris.
27 of 107

Warts that appear as skin bumps with rough surfaces and tiny black specks. - These come from HPV (human papillomavirus).

Describe epidermal inclusion cyst.
28 of 107

Sebaceous cyst or epidermoid cyst that arises from the infundibulum of the hair follicle.

Describe seborrheic keratoses.
29 of 107

A dark benign "stuck on" pigmented lesion in elderly.

Describe the meaning of pedunculated:
30 of 107

Describes the stem like segment that attaches a lesion to soft tissue.

Describe milia.
31 of 107

Small, raised, round, white, sharp cystic lesions of the eyelids. They are superficial keratin cysts that are usually asymptomatic. Common in newborn infants.

Describe keratoacanthoma.
32 of 107

A dome-shaped nodule, with a central, keratin-filled crater and elevated, rolled margins. - ASSOCIATED WITH IMMUNOSUPPRESSED HIV PATIENTS. Can be precursor to squamous cell carcinoma.

Identify the lesion: These lesions have a yellow-brown or erythematous color, an oval shape, and are white and scaly. They arise from SUN EXPOSURE.
33 of 107

Actinic keratosis (solar keratosis)

A characteristic S-shaped curve to the upper lid margin is pathognomonic for____.
34 of 107

neurofibroma-1 (NF-1)

A port wine stain of eyelids and cheeks is associated to what systemic disease?
35 of 107

Sturge-Weber

Describe Sturge Weber.
36 of 107

A systemic condition association with port wine stain, abnormal blood vessels on the brain's surface, brain atrophy, and deposits of calcium in the cerebral cortex. This condition causes seizures and glaucoma.

Describe a capillary hemangioma.
37 of 107

Also called a "strawberry nevus"-- it is the most common benign periorbital tumor of childhood. This lesion is a vascular hamartoma derived from endothelial cells.

Describe a cavernous hemangioma.
38 of 107

Purple grape-like clusters of capillaries swell, and form an angioma.

Name the lesion: A pedunculated, reddish lesion with rapid growth. This lesion most commonly follows minor trauma or surgery.
39 of 107

pyogenic granuloma

Describe xanthelasma (xanthoma).
40 of 107

A sign of HYPERLIPIDEMIA. Yellow skin plaques medial on the eyelids.

Describe nevus of Ota.
41 of 107

Blue skin coloration - A benign dermal melanocytosis, that results in hyperpigmentation of the sclera and ipsilateral face. Rarely is associated to uveal melanomas.

Describe Kaposi sarcoma.
42 of 107

A cancer ASSOCIATED TO AIDS. Here, cancer cells cause red blotches throughout the body.

Name the lesion: Nodular lesion appears as a firm, pearly, dome-shaped nodule, often displaying multiple telangiectatic vessels with an ulcerative core.
43 of 107

"rodent ulcer" or basal cell carcinoma

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), a malignant neoplasm of the __.
44 of 107

epidermal keratinizing cells - Often it presents as painless plaques or nodules with variable degrees of scale, crust, and ulceration.

Name the lesion: This lesion has growth derived from the meibomian glands. It is a slowly enlarging, firm, and painless mass affecting the tarsal plate or the eyelid margin. These lesions may also exhibit varying degrees of yellow coloration due to the presence of lipid within the mass.
45 of 107

sebaceous cell carcinoma

List the functions of meibum:
46 of 107

Prevents tear evaporation. Prevents contamination of the tear film by providing a barrier to cutaneous sebum. Lowers the surface tension of tears. Provides a smooth optical surface.

Name the finding: - Rash on unilateral face and forehead from herpes zoster virus (HZV).
47 of 107

vesicles (or varicella virus)

Name the finding: - When herpes zoster virus rash affects the tip of nose and lip.
48 of 107

Hutchinson sign

This increases risk of corneal involvement. Name the lesion:

Skin-colored, dome-shaped papules, with a waxy curd-like UMBILICATED core.
49 of 107

molluscum

Name the virus associated to molluscum.
50 of 107

The pox virus molluscum contagiosum

Differentiate between internal vs external hordeolum: styes
51 of 107

1. internal hordeolum involve meibomian glands - 2. external hordeolum involve glands of  Zeiss, Moll, or hair follicles (more external in anatomy)

Differentiate hordeolum vs chalazion.
52 of 107

Hordeolum is soft, painful & tender. Topical medications can attack it! - Chalazion is hard encapsulated, past the point of tenderness, topical meds usually doesn't attack it well, needs surgical incision and drainage.

True or False? Impetigo is a form OF VIRAL infection that presents with small diffuse painful nodules on face lips and lids.
53 of 107

False - IMPETIGO IS BACTERIAL but looks viral. Common causes are staph or strep bacteria.

Chronic canaliculitis, usually caused by the bacteria  _____.
54 of 107

Actinomyces Israelii 

Actinomyces israelii are gram-positive bacteria and are antibiotic resistant because they actively make a biofilm in the puncta and canals. They are sensitive to what oral antibiotics?
55 of 107

penicillin, cefazolin, fluoroquinolones, chloramphenicol, doxycycline, and erythromycin. - Antibiotic therapy should last for a long period due to the ability that A. israelii has to form biofilms, which are more difficult to penetrate by antibiotic. 

Describe phthiriasis palpebrarum.
56 of 107

THERE HE IS: CRAB (pubic louse)

Describe the treatment of phthiriasis palpebrarum.
57 of 107

plucking off or cutting lashes, using anti-pubic lice shampoo and suffocating the lice with with a thick ointment like erythromycin or vaseline.

Differentiate dacryoadenitis vs dacryocystitis.
58 of 107

dacryoADENitis = LACRIMAL GLAND inflammation - dacryoCYSTitis = NASOLACRIMAL SAC inflammation

Jones I and Jones II testing positive when:
59 of 107

yellow is found at the nose, so the punctal path is open. - *POSITIVE IS PATENT*

Differentiate Jones I vs Jones II techniques.
60 of 107

Jones I: NO SALINE wash, just fluress strip on palpebral conjunctiva and/or qtip and observed at the nose. - Jones II: Uses a syringe needle to push saline down.

Name the infestation of lashes: microscopic mite on lashes, that shows cylindrical dandruff on the base of lashes resulting in redness and foreign body sensation.
61 of 107

Demodex

Name a common bacteria that is associated with ANGULAR blepharitis and FOLLICULAR conjunctivitis (recall that bacteria are not usually associated with a follicular reaction).
62 of 107

MORAXELLA

Name the diagnosis of the adnexa: AN INFECTION ANTERIOR to the orbital septum, presenting with eyelid edema, erythema, and warmth.
63 of 107

preseptal cellulitis

Name 5 common causes of orbital cellulitis. Presenting as: A condition manifesting posterior to the orbital septum associated with eyelid pain, discoloration, swelling, fever/malaise, proptosis, impaired ocular movement, and impaired vision.
64 of 107

1.ocular infection spreading from surrounding sinuses (ethmoid sinus) 2. upper respiratory infection 3. penetrating insect bite 4. trauma with secondary infection 5. contagious spread of infection from dental or facial abscess

Which condition will present with ORBITAL CONGESTION AKA ORBITAL COMPARTMENT SYNDROME: ??preseptal cellulitis or orbital cellulitis??
65 of 107

Orbital cellulitis is much more serious and will show orbital congestion.

Describe orbital compartment syndrome (aka orbital congestion).
66 of 107

*caused by orbital cellulitis *elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) *with or without a decrease in the visual acuity *proptosis *a tight orbit *a relative afferent pupillary defect *intraocular vascular changes *slow extraocular movements
*possible diplopia

Orbical cellulitis is infection posterior to orbital septum. Name which sinus infection is a common cause.
67 of 107

ethmoid sinus (the infection spreads through the thin lamina papyracea)

Is a dental infection is more likely to cause preseptal or orbital cellulitis?
68 of 107

orbital cellulitis

Why is orbital cellulitis so concerning?
69 of 107

The condition ca spread to the brain and cause cavernous sinus thrombosis, brain abscess, or meningitis.

Describe mucormycosis.
70 of 107

A FUNGAL infection (from orbital cellulitis) that CAUSES BLACK NECROTIC TISSUE IN THE MOUTH AND NOSE. Think: diabetics with orbital cellulitis and black tissue.

An orbital fracture causing entrapment can disrupt what muscle and nerve?
71 of 107

Inferior rectus (can't look up), V2 (infraorbital/ zygomatic nerve): causing hypothesia of the cheek

The weakest bone in the orbit is the floor. Commonly, this is broken in a "blowout fracture". Name the bone that forms the floor of the orbit that is prone to breaking in this case.
72 of 107

maxillary bone

Describe crepitus.
73 of 107

crackling sound. This can be heard when feeling lower bones after an orbital floor fracture.

True or False?  Patients should NOT BLOW THEIR NOSE UNTIL 48 HOURS after orbital blowout fracture.
74 of 107

True - to decrease the risk of infection and IOP spike

Describe ecchymosis.
75 of 107

bruising

Thyroid eye disease (TED)is a common cause of proptosis. HYPERthyroidism can be a result of the autoimmune condition:
76 of 107

Grave's Disease

Name something increases the risk of proptosis associated with Thyroid Eye Disease by 2-9x's.
77 of 107

Smoking cigarettes, especially in females.

Thickening of extraocular muscles (EOMs) in Grave's is common due to TSH-inducing inflammation. What EOM is usually affected first?
78 of 107

Inferior rectus (then medial, superior, then lateral, and obliques)

Differentiate "IMSLO" vs. Spiral of Tillaux.
79 of 107

See image below.

True or False? Graves can present with upper lid retraction and optic nerve compression.
80 of 107

TRUE

Describe Von Graefe's sign.
81 of 107

upper lid lag in DOWNGAZE in TED

Describe Kocher's sign.
82 of 107

GLOBE LAG compared to lid movement speed in UPGAZE

Describe Dalrymple's sign.
83 of 107

lid retraction giving the patient a STARING appearance

Describe the pathognomonic MRI finding on for Thyroid Eye Disease.
84 of 107

TENDONS are spared in swelling, only EOMS are swollen.

Differentiate blood work in HYPER vs HYPO thyroidism. Is TSH vs T3/T4 is high or low for each condition?
85 of 107

Hyperthyroid: High T3/T4 but LOW TSH  Hypothyroidism: Low T3/T4 but HIGH TSH. - TSH LEVELS ARE THE OPPOSITE OF THE DIAGNOSIS. HYPO SHOWS HIGH TSH VS HYPER SHOWS LOW TSH. T3/T4 level matches diagnosis.

List Hertel exophthalmometry norms for for Asian, Caucasian, and African American populations.
86 of 107

12-18mm Asians, 12-22mm Caucasians, 12-24mm African Americans

Name the common benign orbital tumor in children usually resolves by age 7-10. It can rarely cause deprivation amblyopia if it blocks vision.
87 of 107

capillary hemangioma

Name the MALIGNANT pediatric PRIMARY (starts at orbit and spreads) ORBITAL BONE DESTRUCTING TUMOR.
88 of 107

rhabdomyosarcoma

Name the SECONDARY (starts in the abdomen and spreads then to the eye) orbital tumor associated with bilateral upper lid ecchymosis.
89 of 107

neuroblastoma

Name the tumor of the optic nerve that pushes the eye forward and snuffs out vision.
90 of 107

optic nerve glioma

Name the most common intracranial tumor to invade the orbit.
91 of 107

sphenoid meningioma

Schwann cells create myelin sheath.

Name a common orbital tumor affecting the Schwann cells.
92 of 107

Neurilemmoma

Name the condition associated with acute onset of unilateral pain, decreased vision, proptosis and EOM RESTRICTIONS. The presentation looks like a tumor, but there is no tumor finding on a MRI.
93 of 107

Orbital Pseudotumor aka Idiopathic Orbital Inflammatory Syndrome (IOIS)

Name the finding is used to describe shrinkage of the globe and hypotony after trauma, infection, surgery.
94 of 107

phthisis bulbi

Differentiate enucleation vs evisceration vs exenteration.
95 of 107

ENUCLEATION: REMOVAL OF GLOBE EVISCERATION: ONLY INNER CONTENTS REMOVED(sclera remains as hollow eye shell)
EXENTERATION: All contents within the bony orbit including EOMS and FAT are ALL CUT OUT

If you read: "telangiectasia and facial flushing..." Think: what lid disease?
96 of 107

ocular rosacea

Contact dermatitis is a skin allergy (itching and scaling and redness) that is type __ hypersensitivity.
97 of 107

type 4

Name the severe conjunctival disease: Marked by mucus membranes / soft tissues  becoming scarred and fibrotic with very painful, bilateral symblepharon. More commonly occurring in female.
98 of 107

ocular cicatricial pemphigoid

Name the severe conjunctival disease:

Marked by mucus membranes / soft tissues becoming scarred and fibrotic with very painful, bilateral symblepharon. Often uniquely associated to SULFA OR OTHER MEDICATION ALLERGY.
99 of 107

Steven Johnson Syndrome

Differentiate ptosis vs dermatochalasis.
100 of 107

Ptosis: typically muscle weakening associated to eyelid droop. - Dermatochalasis: weakened orbital septum with redundant SKIN along with eyelid droop.

Ocular Disease
Adnexa Deck 2 of 2
6 flashcards

Differentiate myokymia vs Benign Essential Blepharospasm (BEB).
101 of 107

Myokymia: twitching (non-worrisome). Typically monocular and involving the orbicularis muscle only. - BEB: twitching and spasm of three muscles (orbicularis, procerus, and corrugator). Typically bilateral and non-worrisome still.

Describe Meige Syndrome.
102 of 107

Benign Essential Blepharospasm (BEB) plus lower facial abnormalities (chewing issues). The condition can be treated with injectable botulinum toxin (botox).
103 of 107

Rarely recurrent chalazion that will not resolve can be a result of:
104 of 107

sebaceous gland carcinoma

ABCDE Mnemonic of skin lesions that can be suspicious for cancer.
105 of 107

(A)Asymmetry (B) Border irregular (C) Color uneven (D) Diameter >6mm (pencil eraser size) (E) evolving

Acute dacryoadenitis can be associated to the systemic condition:
106 of 107

sarcoidosis

Viral _____ can cause dacryoadenitis.
107 of 107

mononucleosis ("kissing disease")
