Neuro-Ocular
Pupillary Pathways
52 flashcards

True or False: The pupil is perfectly centered in the iris:
1 of 73

False. The pupil sits slightly superior and nasal.

The iris sphincter is under____ autonomic control, while the dilator muscle is under ____ autonomic control.
2 of 73

Sphincter= parasympathetic
 Dilator= sympathetic

Easy way to remember dilator is under sympathetic control…
3 of 73

Eyes are dilated when you see a bear.

Your eyes get big with fright.

Fight or flight is sympathetic.

Name the steps of the sympathetic pupil pathway
4 of 73

1. Starts at the hypothalamus
2. Down to C8-T2
3. Over lung, up through stellate ganglion (BUT DOES NOT SYNAPSE HERE)
4. Synapses at superior cervical ganglion & intertwines with carotid artery
5. Passes through ciliary ganglion (DOES NOT SYNAPSE)

Name the 3 neurons / ganglia of sympathetic pupil pathway
5 of 73

1. 1st order synapses at ciliospinal center of budge (T2) ganglion
2. 2nd order synapses at the superior cervical ganglion
3. 3rd order terminates at dilator (no synapse as it passes through the ciliary ganglion)

C8-T2– where the first order neuron synapses with the the 2nd order neuron– is called:
6 of 73

ciliospinal center of budge

What does 1st order, 2nd order, 3rd order neurons in sympathetic pupillary pathway mean?
7 of 73

1. 1st order means prior to its first synapse (from hypothalamus down to C8-T2)
2. The first synapse is with the 2nd order neuron, which travels through the sympathetic chain and over the lung.
3. The second synapse is at the superior cervical ganglion occurs between the 2nd and 3rd order neuron. The third neuron follows the internal carotid into the skull, through the cavernous sinus, and through ciliary ganglion to the dilator.

What does POSTGANGLIONIC and PREGANGLIONIC mean when referring to sympathetic pupil pathway?
8 of 73

Preganglionic means before superior cervical ganglion (order 1 and 2) 
Postganglionic means after the superior cervical ganglion (only order 3)REMEMBER THERE IS NO SYNAPSE AT CILIARY GANGLION

Which cranial nerve does the sympathetic pupillary 3rd order neuron merge with while passing through the ciliary ganglion?
9 of 73

The nasociliary root of the trigeminal nerve         (CNV)

Name two nuclei / ganglia of the parasympathetic pupillary pathway:
10 of 73

1. Ciliary ganglion (Parasympathetic DOES ACTUALLY SYNAPSE HERE) 
2.Edinger Westphal Nuclei of CN III 

Miosis is controlled by the ____ autonomic system.
11 of 73

parasympathetic

Mydriasis is controlled by the  ____ autonomic system.
12 of 73

sympathetic

Anisocoria is…
13 of 73

two different pupil sizes

Name 3 functions of pupil actions:
14 of 73

Control how much light can get into the eye to the retina
2. Control aberrations
3. Increase depth of focus

Anisocoria that is worse in the dark (a greater difference in pupil size in dim illumination) means:
15 of 73

There is a sympathetic problem (think: sympathetic is a dark pathway. You are sad in the dark.)ie Horner's

Anisocoria worse in light (ie the difference in pupil size is even more pronounced in light conditions than in dim conditions) is a problem of:
16 of 73

The parasympathetic nervous system (think: parasympathetic is the light pathway)ie Adie's tonic pupil

If anisocoria is worse in the dark, we start considering sympathetic problems like:
17 of 73

Horner's

If anisocoria is worse in the light, we start thinking of parasympathetic problems like:
18 of 73

Adie's (or pharmacological dilation unilateral)

Amaurotic pupil means:
19 of 73

A blind eye with no light perception whatsoever. Think of an eye with a cut ipsilateral optic nerve that has no direct response but still has a consensual response. 

When light shine in the healthy fellow eye, both will still constrict, but there is no direct response.

Name 3 signs of Horner's sympathetic problem:
20 of 73

IPSILATERAL

1. Ptosis  2. Anhidrosis3. MiosisPAM the UNIcorn has a HORN

Sympathetic pupil pathway fibers also innervate:
21 of 73

Muller’s muscle (smooth eyelid elevation muscle) AND  sweat glands under jaw (mandible)

True or False? A lesion to any of the 3 ordered neurons of the sympathetic pupil pathway (1st order neuron, 2nd order neuron, 3rd order neuron) can cause miosis, anhidrosis, and ptosis.
22 of 73

False. While lesions at any level of the sympathetic pupil pathway can cause miosis (constricted pupil) and ptosis (drooping eyelid) due to disruption of sympathetic innervation, the presence of  anhidrosis (loss of sweating) depends on the lesion location.3rd-order neuron lesions (postganglionic lesion, e.g., carotid artery dissection, cavernous sinus pathology) results in miosis, ptosis, but NO anhidrosis.

Name some causes of “1st order” Horner's syndrome:
23 of 73

hypothalamus or pituitary tumors, brain stem or spinal cord injuries, demyelinating diseases

Name some causes of “2nd  order” Horner's syndrome:
24 of 73

pancoast tumor of the lung, subclavian aneurysm, thyroid tumor

Name some causes of “3rd order” Horner's syndrome:
25 of 73

cavernous sinus fistula, carotid dissection

Name the cranial nerves that travel inside the cavernous  sinus:
26 of 73

CN 3, 4, 5, 6 

other structures: internal carotid (sympathetic  fibers)

In a painful Horner's syndrome (headache, neck pain)  consider:
27 of 73

cavernous sinus thrombosis (can come with a pulsating eye aka “bruit”), carotid artery dissection

The partial ptosis that happens in Horner's syndrome is due to the lack of sympathetic input to which muscle?
28 of 73

Muller's muscle

True or False? Cocaine dilates eyes.

An eye that does not dilate after instilling cocaine  has Horner's syndrome.

Cocaine confirms Horner's syndrome is present, but does not locate which neuron in the sympathetic pathway blown.
29 of 73

True

Anisocoria of _____ mm or more is considered diagnostic in Horner’s cocaine testing.
30 of 73

0.8mm

True or False?  Cocaine confirms Horner's syndrome but does not locate which neuron in the sympathetic pathway is  blown.

Hydroxyamphetamine locates the lesion in Horner's syndrome.
31 of 73

True. Cocaine confirms the Horner's problem is present. Hydroxyamphetamine is used to lacate 3rd order / postganglionic problems.

hydroxyamphetamine isolates 3rd order postganglionic lesions by:
32 of 73

Hydroxyamphetamine stimulates the release of stored norepinephrine only from the postganglionic terminals into the synapse.

Which eye has 3rd neuron/postganglionic lesion  problem in the hydroxyamphetamine test?
33 of 73

the eye that does NOT dilate

Cocaine and hydroxyamphetamine show the problem eye in Horner's will not dilate.

In Horner’s testing apraclonidine shows the  problem eye (dilates or does not dilate?)
34 of 73

Apraclonidine causes the problematic eye to dilates“apra-kadabra!” Apraclonidine causes the reversal of anisocoria in Horner’s syndrome (small eye gets big) 

Why does apraclonidine work to dilate the problem eye in Horner's syndrome?
35 of 73

Apraclonidine acts as an alpha-1 and alpha-2 agonist. The upregulation of alpha1-receptors in Horner’s syndrome translates into an exaggerated response of the iris dilator (“denervation supersensitivity”).

RAPD is shown by:
36 of 73

Swinging Flashlight Test: 

The eye has a good consensual response; however a big dilation (instead of staying constricted) on direct response.

True or False? When an RAPD is present in one eye, the direct reflex to that eye is MORE than the consensual reflex of the same eye.
37 of 73

False. RAPD shows less DIRECT Response compared to consensual.

Near triad consists of:
38 of 73

accommodation, convergence, pupil constriction

Near triad is also known as:
39 of 73

near synkinesis

Near triad pathway:
40 of 73

retina→ optic nerve→ chiasm→ tract→ LGN→ optic radiations→ occipital lobe→ Edinger-Westphal nuclei→ CN III→ to iris sphincter OU & medial rectus OU

True or False? In a blind patient, a near target results in a similar activation of the visual association and supranuclear mechanisms that do not require vision, resulting in the same near triad  of accommodation, miosis, and convergence — even without sight.
41 of 73

True! Blind eyes still have near triad due to supranuclear input!

Light near dissociation (LND) means:
42 of 73

There is no pupillary constriction to light; however, there is still a response with near targets.

Is light near dissociation (LND) is unilateral or bilateral?
43 of 73

LND can be unilateral or bilateral.

What causes light near dissociation (LND) problems?
44 of 73

Anterior visual pathway injury (pathology before the lateral geniculate bodies).

What are the characteristics of the parasympathetic Adie's tonic pupil?
45 of 73

The pupil won't constrict.The problem eye is the dilated eye. There is still a near response but no light constriction (LND). Usually a virus blows out parasympathetic fibers of the ciliary ganglion in young females.

To confirm Horner's: name the two drops you can use.
46 of 73

1. Apraclonidine: causes reversal, small miotic eye 
 now becomes the big eye.
2. Cocaine: miotic eye stays miotic, normal eye dilates.

What does apraclonidine do to the Horner's' eye?
47 of 73

*confirms Horner's syndrome*normally causes miosis due to alpha-2 activation*in sympathetic (Horner's), alpha-1 takes over and DILATES THE PROBLEM EYE

What does cocaine do to a Horner's syndrome eye?
48 of 73

* Confirms Horner's* miotic eye remains miotic (so it does nothing to the Horner’s eye and dilates the healthy eye)* blocks norepinephrine reuptake

What does hydroxyamphetamine do to an eye with Horner's syndrome?
49 of 73

* locates the lesion * blocks norepinephrine
* 1st and 2nd order lesions= still dilate
* 3rd order lesion= does not dilate

Associations of anisocoria greater in BRIGHT VS DARK:
50 of 73

Bright = parasympathetic (Adie's)
Dark = 
sympathetic 
(Horner's)

Mnemonic to remember cocaine and apraclonidine use to confirm Horner's:
51 of 73

CONFIRM A
 
PAM'ER

Mnemonic to remember hydroxyamphetamine locates Horner’s lesions:
52 of 73

WHERE IS IT


Neuro-Ocular
Glaucoma
21 flashcards

Average IOP (range)
53 of 73

10-22 mmHg

The rate of aqueous humor production is determined by the activity of what two enzymes?
54 of 73

Na+-K+ ATPase and Carbonic Anhydrase

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs) in glaucoma drops reduce aqueous production. What other effect does it have on corneal fluid?
55 of 73

In the cornea natural carbonic anhydrase 
draws fluid out, so by inhibiting it the cornea will swell.

So in glaucomatous eyes with corneal edema, choose another drop!

How do prostaglandin drops work to increase aqueous outflow?
56 of 73

They bind to smooth muscles at the ciliary body to increase uveoscleral outflow, make MMPs (matrix metalloproteinases) to remodel the trabecular meshwork (minor effect) and reduce resistance.

Uveoscleral outflow passes through:
57 of 73

extracellular spaces within the ciliary muscle and then through the suprachoroidal space (to the posterior pole of the eye)

True or False? Prostaglandins are linked to inflammation and should not be used on eyes with history of inflammation (such as in those with herpes simplex virus).
58 of 73

TRUE

How do beta blocker drops reduce IOP?
59 of 73

The decrease sympathetic nerve synaptic activity which in turn tells the non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body to stop making aqueous.

 (BETA BLOCKERS WORK BY DECREASING AQUEOUS PRODUCTION) 

Which (parasympathetic or sympathetic) autonomic nervous controls dictate the aqueous humor outflow and inflow?
60 of 73

Trick question. Studies have conflicting evidence that both PNS and SNS increase inflow and outflow. More studies show the sympathetic has a greater role in aqueous production and parasympathetic has a greater role in outflow during pupil constriction.

Is IOP higher when lying down or sitting?
61 of 73

When laying down IOP is higher (and higher on the side closest to the pillow i.e. laying on the right side, right eye IOP is higher up to 3 mmHg)

THICK central corneal thickness= ?

low IOP reading or high IOP reading?
62 of 73

thick CCT= falsely higher IOP

Is high blood pressure correlated to higher IOP?
63 of 73

yes– but minutely. Studies show that 10 point systolic BP increase can be linked to .26 mmHg increase IOP.

Name three mechanisms of aqueous humor production:
64 of 73

1. Diffusion (PASSIVE)2. Ultrafiltration (PASSIVE)3. Active secretion (ACTIVE)

Describe diffusion vs ultrafiltration in aqueous formation.
65 of 73

Both are passive formation of aqueous.1. Diffusion: relies on lipid soluble concentration transported across the lipid membrane.
2. Ultrafiltration: Relies on water solubility (osmotic gradient or hydrostatic pressure at fenestrated nonpigmented CB)

Active secretion of aqueous formation makes up how much aqueous?
66 of 73

90%

What is “actively working” in aqueous active secretion?
67 of 73

Aquaporins act as transporters.

How much does IOP drop during accommodation?
68 of 73

3 mmHg

What is the underlying disease state of glaucoma?
69 of 73

optic nerve fiber death

Name 5 types of glaucoma:
70 of 73

1. POAG (primary open angle)2. NAG (narrow angle)3. LTG (low tension)4. Secondary (something makes the glaucoma like uveitis)5. Congenital (birth)

Name examples of causes of secondary glaucoma:
71 of 73

Secondary glaucoma can be a result of trauma, surgery, inflammation, overuse of steroids, tumors, or other ocular pathologies (pigment dispersion and pseudoexfoliation).

Examples of congenital glaucoma include:
72 of 73



Barkan’s Syndrome and Peters Anomaly

Blood supply:

The prelaminar optic nerve is supplied by_  The optic nerve laminar zone is supplied  by ___ . The post laminar optic nerve  zone is supplied by the __.
73 of 73

1. prelaminar: choroid2. laminar zone: short posterior ciliary pial arteries3. post laminar: pial arteries
