Ocular Disease

Ocular Trauma
24 flashcards

List common alkali basic burns vs acid burns.
1 of 24


True or False? A practitioner should never sweep the upper palpebral conjunctiva after irrigating an eye for a chemical burn due to the risk of them burning their own finger.
2 of 24

False, always evert lids to remove extra foreign bodies that can exude toxins.

Why is phenylephrine avoided in a patient with limbal ischemia after chemical trauma?
3 of 24

because of its vasoconstrictive properties.

Which dilation drop is preferred for patients with  limbal ischemia after chemical trauma?
4 of 24

cycloplegic (scopolamine)

Name a medication preferred for mild chemical burns.
5 of 24

Topical antibiotic OINTMENT every 2 hours while awake.

Should you use topical IOP drops if a chemical burn elevates IOP?
6 of 24

Try to avoid more chemicals on the surface of the eye, so avoid topical drops and skip straight to acetazolamide tablets by mouth.

True or False? Oral tetracyclines have been shown in research to reduce collagenolysis and contribute to stromal melting after chemical burns.
7 of 24

TRUE

Boards answer vs real life: 

What is used to sweep fornices if a symblepharon is noted on slit lamp exam at the fornix?
8 of 24

boards answer: sweep with a glass rod.
 real life: apply a topical anesthetic, sweep with a wet cotton tipped applicator, put on scleral lens or soft bandage CL with dehydrated amniotic membrane.

Boards answer: What is the most appropriate, antibiotic drops or ointment to treat a corneal abrasion caused by a fingernail?
9 of 24

broad spectrum fluoroquinolones like ciprofloxacin or moxifloxacin

True or False? You can cover an abrasion with an extended wear bandage contact lens.
10 of 24

True, it helps the epithelium to heal by avoiding the friction of the upper lid that occurs with blinking.

Should erythromycin be used in corneal abrasions, conjunctival abrasions, or foreign bodies?
11 of 24

No, this needs something with more coverage. Consider polymixin B / Bacitracin ointment.

How is the cycloplegic agent CYCLOPENTOLATE 2% vs SCOPOLAMINE 0.25% vs atropine 1% prescribed in the treatment of traumatic iritis.
12 of 24

*CYCLOPENTOLATE 2%: TID one week* SCOPOLAMINE 0.25%: BID one week *ATROPINE 1%: QD one week

With severe photophobia during traumatic iritis a steroid drop is typically prescribed in a taper  (ex QID one week, TID one week, BID one week, then QAM then stop)

**WHEN SHOULD YOU NOT USE A STEROID**
13 of 24

Any infiltrate present (due to bacteria from a foreign body for example)

If a patient has hyphema in the anterior chamber but does NOT HAVE A HISTORY OF TRAUMA or blood thinner use, suspect:
14 of 24

sickle cell anemia if African American

What is the best pain medication for hyphema after trauma?
15 of 24

NOT NSAIDs!Think acetaminophen (Tylenol) instead due to lack of blood thinning properties.

How do you treat:IOP spike in hyphema from trauma?
16 of 24

Try beta-blockers first.

 Avoid alpha-agonist due to vasoconstrictive properties.

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors reduce aqueous and therefore increase viscosity of blood to allow for clotting

Describe iridodialysis.
17 of 24

The iris torn from scleral spur (iris root).

Describe cyclodialysis.
18 of 24

Ciliary body is torn from scleral spur. WORRY ABOUT ANGLE RECESSION GLAUCOMA.

A new APD after trauma in the absence of pallor or swelling of the nerve could indicate:
19 of 24

retro (behind) bulbar optic nerve head issue (like impingement of optic nerve from bone)

Describe a optic nerve sheath hematoma.
20 of 24

Compression to optic nerve after trauma, corrected with optic nerve sheath fenestration.

True or False: Never remove an INTRAORBITAL Foreign BODY at slit lamp.
21 of 24

True.  Pulling an object out can allow aqueous or vitreous prolapse, or even intracranial bleeding due to pressure change (send to ER with Styrofoam cup or fox shield around area).

Finding: positive seidel What should the OD do until they can get to OMD?
22 of 24

Bandage CL, AQUEOUS SUPPRESSOR DROPS LIKE CAI or Beta blockers, broad spectrum antibiotics like moxifloxacin to prevent infection.

Describe chorioretinitis sclopetaria.
23 of 24

Traumatic retinopathy linked to MILITARY SHRAPNEL OR MISSILE HIGH VELOCITY due to shockwave trauma.“Chorio”retinitis is a misnomer as the choroid usually is not impacted.

True or False? Tylenol is contraindicated in kids after a corneal abrasion due to risk of Reye syndrome.
24 of 24

FALSE, aspirin carries a risk in kids for REYE (increased ammonia levels build up in the brain and cause swelling)
